WELCOME TO CS1380 SIMPLE LINKS

Check out Some stuff [level_2a/index.html].

Check out Some more stuff [level_2b/index.html].

© 2023 CS1380. All rights reserved.
MY BOOK COLLECTION

 * The Picture of Dorian Gray by Oscar Wilde [static/book1.txt]
 * The Iliad by Homer [static/book2.txt]
 * The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes [static/book3.txt]
   
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Picture of Dorian Gray This ebook is for the
use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at
no cost and with almost no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
or re-use it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License included with this
ebook or onlineat www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United
States,you will have to check the laws of the country where you are
locatedbefore using this eBook.Title: The Picture of Dorian GrayAuthor: Oscar
WildeRelease date: October 1, 1994 [eBook #174] Most recently updated: February
3, 2022Language: English*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PICTURE OF
DORIAN GRAY ***The Picture of Dorian Grayby Oscar WildeContents THE PREFACE
CHAPTER I. CHAPTER II. CHAPTER III. CHAPTER IV. CHAPTER V. CHAPTER VI. CHAPTER
VII. CHAPTER VIII. CHAPTER IX. CHAPTER X. CHAPTER XI. CHAPTER XII. CHAPTER XIII.
CHAPTER XIV. CHAPTER XV. CHAPTER XVI. CHAPTER XVII. CHAPTER XVIII. CHAPTER XIX.
CHAPTER XX.THE PREFACEThe artist is the creator of beautiful things. To reveal
art andconceal the artist is art’s aim. The critic is he who can translateinto
another manner or a new material his impression of beautifulthings.The highest
as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography.Those who find ugly
meanings in beautiful things are corrupt withoutbeing charming. This is a
fault.Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are thecultivated.
For these there is hope. They are the elect to whombeautiful things mean only
beauty.There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. Books are
wellwritten, or badly written. That is all.The nineteenth century dislike of
realism is the rage of Caliban seeinghis own face in a glass.The nineteenth
century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Calibannot seeing his own face in
a glass. The moral life of man forms part ofthe subject-matter of the artist,
but the morality of art consists inthe perfect use of an imperfect medium. No
artist desires to proveanything. Even things that are true can be proved. No
artist hasethical sympathies. An ethical sympathy in an artist is an
unpardonablemannerism of style. No artist is ever morbid. The artist can
expresseverything. Thought and language are to the artist instruments of anart.
Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art. From thepoint of view of
form, the type of all the arts is the art of themusician. From the point of view
of feeling, the actor’s craft is thetype. All art is at once surface and symbol.
Those who go beneath thesurface do so at their peril. Those who read the symbol
do so at theirperil. It is the spectator, and not life, that art really
mirrors.Diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the work is
new,complex, and vital. When critics disagree, the artist is in accord
withhimself. We can forgive a man for making a useful thing as long as hedoes
not admire it. The only excuse for making a useless thing is thatone admires it
intensely.All art is quite useless.OSCAR WILDECHAPTER I.The studio was filled
with the rich odour of roses, and when the lightsummer wind stirred amidst the
trees of the garden, there came throughthe open door the heavy scent of the
lilac, or the more delicateperfume of the pink-flowering thorn.From the corner
of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he waslying, smoking, as was his
custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord HenryWotton could just catch the gleam of
the honey-sweet and honey-colouredblossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous
branches seemed hardly able tobear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as
theirs; and now and thenthe fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across
the longtussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge
window,producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think
ofthose pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium ofan art
that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense ofswiftness and motion.
The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering theirway through the long unmown
grass, or circling with monotonousinsistence round the dusty gilt horns of the
straggling woodbine,seemed to make the stillness more oppressive. The dim roar
of Londonwas like the bourdon note of a distant organ.In the centre of the room,
clamped to an upright easel, stood thefull-length portrait of a young man of
extraordinary personal beauty,and in front of it, some little distance away, was
sitting the artisthimself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years
agocaused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so manystrange
conjectures.As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had
soskilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across hisface, and
seemed about to linger there. But he suddenly started up, andclosing his eyes,
placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he soughtto imprison within his
brain some curious dream from which he feared hemight awake.“It is your best
work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done,” saidLord Henry languidly. “You
must certainly send it next year to theGrosvenor. The Academy is too large and
too vulgar. Whenever I havegone there, there have been either so many people
that I have not beenable to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many
pictures thatI have not been able to see the people, which was worse. The
Grosvenoris really the only place.”“I don’t think I shall send it anywhere,” he
answered, tossing his headback in that odd way that used to make his friends
laugh at him atOxford. “No, I won’t send it anywhere.”Lord Henry elevated his
eyebrows and looked at him in amazement throughthe thin blue wreaths of smoke
that curled up in such fanciful whorlsfrom his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette.
“Not send it anywhere? My dearfellow, why? Have you any reason? What odd chaps
you painters are! Youdo anything in the world to gain a reputation. As soon as
you have one,you seem to want to throw it away. It is silly of you, for there
isonly one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that isnot
being talked about. A portrait like this would set you far aboveall the young
men in England, and make the old men quite jealous, ifold men are ever capable
of any emotion.”“I know you will laugh at me,” he replied, “but I really can’t
exhibitit. I have put too much of myself into it.”Lord Henry stretched himself
out on the divan and laughed.“Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all
the same.”“Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn’t know
youwere so vain; and I really can’t see any resemblance between you, withyour
rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this youngAdonis, who looks as
if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. Why,my dear Basil, he is a
Narcissus, and you—well, of course you have anintellectual expression and all
that. But beauty, real beauty, endswhere an intellectual expression begins.
Intellect is in itself a modeof exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any
face. The moment onesits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead,
or somethinghorrid. Look at the successful men in any of the learned
professions.How perfectly hideous they are! Except, of course, in the Church.
Butthen in the Church they don’t think. A bishop keeps on saying at theage of
eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen,and as a natural
consequence he always looks absolutely delightful.Your mysterious young friend,
whose name you have never told me, butwhose picture really fascinates me, never
thinks. I feel quite sure ofthat. He is some brainless beautiful creature who
should be always herein winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always
here in summerwhen we want something to chill our intelligence. Don’t
flatteryourself, Basil: you are not in the least like him.”“You don’t understand
me, Harry,” answered the artist. “Of course I amnot like him. I know that
perfectly well. Indeed, I should be sorry tolook like him. You shrug your
shoulders? I am telling you the truth.There is a fatality about all physical and
intellectual distinction,the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history
the falteringsteps of kings. It is better not to be different from one’s
fellows.The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world. They can
sitat their ease and gape at the play. If they know nothing of victory,they are
at least spared the knowledge of defeat. They live as we allshould
live—undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet. Theyneither bring ruin upon
others, nor ever receive it from alien hands.Your rank and wealth, Harry; my
brains, such as they are—my art,whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray’s good
looks—we shall all sufferfor what the gods have given us, suffer
terribly.”“Dorian Gray? Is that his name?” asked Lord Henry, walking across
thestudio towards Basil Hallward.“Yes, that is his name. I didn’t intend to tell
it to you.”“But why not?”“Oh, I can’t explain. When I like people immensely, I
never tell theirnames to any one. It is like surrendering a part of them. I have
grownto love secrecy. It seems to be the one thing that can make modern
lifemysterious or marvellous to us. The commonest thing is delightful ifone only
hides it. When I leave town now I never tell my people where Iam going. If I
did, I would lose all my pleasure. It is a silly habit,I dare say, but somehow
it seems to bring a great deal of romance intoone’s life. I suppose you think me
awfully foolish about it?”“Not at all,” answered Lord Henry, “not at all, my
dear Basil. You seemto forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage
is that itmakes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties.
Inever know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing.When we
meet—we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or godown to the
Duke’s—we tell each other the most absurd stories with themost serious faces. My
wife is very good at it—much better, in fact,than I am. She never gets confused
over her dates, and I always do. Butwhen she does find me out, she makes no row
at all. I sometimes wishshe would; but she merely laughs at me.”“I hate the way
you talk about your married life, Harry,” said BasilHallward, strolling towards
the door that led into the garden. “Ibelieve that you are really a very good
husband, but that you arethoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. You are an
extraordinaryfellow. You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong
thing.Your cynicism is simply a pose.”“Being natural is simply a pose, and the
most irritating pose I know,”cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men
went out into thegarden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat
thatstood in the shade of a tall laurel bush. The sunlight slipped over
thepolished leaves. In the grass, white daisies were tremulous.After a pause,
Lord Henry pulled out his watch. “I am afraid I must begoing, Basil,” he
murmured, “and before I go, I insist on youranswering a question I put to you
some time ago.”“What is that?” said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the
ground.“You know quite well.”“I do not, Harry.”“Well, I will tell you what it
is. I want you to explain to me why youwon’t exhibit Dorian Gray’s picture. I
want the real reason.”“I told you the real reason.”“No, you did not. You said it
was because there was too much ofyourself in it. Now, that is childish.”“Harry,”
said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, “everyportrait that is
painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, notof the sitter. The sitter
is merely the accident, the occasion. It isnot he who is revealed by the
painter; it is rather the painter who, onthe coloured canvas, reveals himself.
The reason I will not exhibitthis picture is that I am afraid that I have shown
in it the secret ofmy own soul.”Lord Henry laughed. “And what is that?” he
asked.“I will tell you,” said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity cameover
his face.“I am all expectation, Basil,” continued his companion, glancing
athim.“Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry,” answered the
painter;“and I am afraid you will hardly understand it. Perhaps you will
hardlybelieve it.”Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled
daisy fromthe grass and examined it. “I am quite sure I shall understand it,”
hereplied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk,“and as
for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that itis quite
incredible.”The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the
heavylilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in thelanguid
air. A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like ablue thread a long
thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauzewings. Lord Henry felt as if he
could hear Basil Hallward’s heartbeating, and wondered what was coming.“The
story is simply this,” said the painter after some time. “Twomonths ago I went
to a crush at Lady Brandon’s. You know we poorartists have to show ourselves in
society from time to time, just toremind the public that we are not savages.
With an evening coat and awhite tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a
stock-broker, can gaina reputation for being civilized. Well, after I had been
in the roomabout ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and
tediousacademicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking atme.
I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.When our eyes
met, I felt that I was growing pale. A curious sensationof terror came over me.
I knew that I had come face to face with someone whose mere personality was so
fascinating that, if I allowed it todo so, it would absorb my whole nature, my
whole soul, my very artitself. I did not want any external influence in my life.
You knowyourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature. I have always been
myown master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray.Then—but I
don’t know how to explain it to you. Something seemed totell me that I was on
the verge of a terrible crisis in my life. I hada strange feeling that fate had
in store for me exquisite joys andexquisite sorrows. I grew afraid and turned to
quit the room. It wasnot conscience that made me do so: it was a sort of
cowardice. I takeno credit to myself for trying to escape.”“Conscience and
cowardice are really the same things, Basil. Conscienceis the trade-name of the
firm. That is all.”“I don’t believe that, Harry, and I don’t believe you do
either.However, whatever was my motive—and it may have been pride, for I usedto
be very proud—I certainly struggled to the door. There, of course, Istumbled
against Lady Brandon. ‘You are not going to run away so soon,Mr. Hallward?’ she
screamed out. You know her curiously shrill voice?”“Yes; she is a peacock in
everything but beauty,” said Lord Henry,pulling the daisy to bits with his long
nervous fingers.“I could not get rid of her. She brought me up to royalties, and
peoplewith stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras andparrot
noses. She spoke of me as her dearest friend. I had only met heronce before, but
she took it into her head to lionize me. I believesome picture of mine had made
a great success at the time, at least hadbeen chattered about in the penny
newspapers, which is thenineteenth-century standard of immortality. Suddenly I
found myselfface to face with the young man whose personality had so
strangelystirred me. We were quite close, almost touching. Our eyes met again.It
was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.Perhaps it
was not so reckless, after all. It was simply inevitable. Wewould have spoken to
each other without any introduction. I am sure ofthat. Dorian told me so
afterwards. He, too, felt that we were destinedto know each other.”“And how did
Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?” asked hiscompanion. “I know she
goes in for giving a rapid _précis_ of all herguests. I remember her bringing me
up to a truculent and red-faced oldgentleman covered all over with orders and
ribbons, and hissing into myear, in a tragic whisper which must have been
perfectly audible toeverybody in the room, the most astounding details. I simply
fled. Ilike to find out people for myself. But Lady Brandon treats her
guestsexactly as an auctioneer treats his goods. She either explains
thementirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wantsto
know.”“Poor Lady Brandon! You are hard on her, Harry!” said
Hallwardlistlessly.“My dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only
succeeded inopening a restaurant. How could I admire her? But tell me, what did
shesay about Mr. Dorian Gray?”“Oh, something like, ‘Charming boy—poor dear
mother and I absolutelyinseparable. Quite forget what he does—afraid he—doesn’t
doanything—oh, yes, plays the piano—or is it the violin, dear Mr. Gray?’Neither
of us could help laughing, and we became friends at once.”“Laughter is not at
all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is farthe best ending for one,”
said the young lord, plucking another daisy.Hallward shook his head. “You don’t
understand what friendship is,Harry,” he murmured—“or what enmity is, for that
matter. You like everyone; that is to say, you are indifferent to every
one.”“How horribly unjust of you!” cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat backand
looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins ofglossy white silk,
were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of thesummer sky. “Yes; horribly
unjust of you. I make a great differencebetween people. I choose my friends for
their good looks, myacquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for
their goodintellects. A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies.
Ihave not got one who is a fool. They are all men of some intellectualpower, and
consequently they all appreciate me. Is that very vain ofme? I think it is
rather vain.”“I should think it was, Harry. But according to your category I
must bemerely an acquaintance.”“My dear old Basil, you are much more than an
acquaintance.”“And much less than a friend. A sort of brother, I suppose?”“Oh,
brothers! I don’t care for brothers. My elder brother won’t die,and my younger
brothers seem never to do anything else.”“Harry!” exclaimed Hallward,
frowning.“My dear fellow, I am not quite serious. But I can’t help detesting
myrelations. I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can standother
people having the same faults as ourselves. I quite sympathizewith the rage of
the English democracy against what they call the vicesof the upper orders. The
masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, andimmorality should be their own
special property, and that if any one ofus makes an ass of himself, he is
poaching on their preserves. Whenpoor Southwark got into the divorce court,
their indignation was quitemagnificent. And yet I don’t suppose that ten per
cent of theproletariat live correctly.”“I don’t agree with a single word that
you have said, and, what ismore, Harry, I feel sure you don’t either.”Lord Henry
stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of hispatent-leather boot
with a tasselled ebony cane. “How English you areBasil! That is the second time
you have made that observation. If oneputs forward an idea to a true
Englishman—always a rash thing to do—henever dreams of considering whether the
idea is right or wrong. Theonly thing he considers of any importance is whether
one believes itoneself. Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do
withthe sincerity of the man who expresses it. Indeed, the probabilitiesare that
the more insincere the man is, the more purely intellectualwill the idea be, as
in that case it will not be coloured by either hiswants, his desires, or his
prejudices. However, I don’t propose todiscuss politics, sociology, or
metaphysics with you. I like personsbetter than principles, and I like persons
with no principles betterthan anything else in the world. Tell me more about Mr.
Dorian Gray.How often do you see him?”“Every day. I couldn’t be happy if I
didn’t see him every day. He isabsolutely necessary to me.”“How extraordinary! I
thought you would never care for anything butyour art.”“He is all my art to me
now,” said the painter gravely. “I sometimesthink, Harry, that there are only
two eras of any importance in theworld’s history. The first is the appearance of
a new medium for art,and the second is the appearance of a new personality for
art also.What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face
ofAntinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray willsome day
be to me. It is not merely that I paint from him, draw fromhim, sketch from him.
Of course, I have done all that. But he is muchmore to me than a model or a
sitter. I won’t tell you that I amdissatisfied with what I have done of him, or
that his beauty is suchthat art cannot express it. There is nothing that art
cannot express,and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is
goodwork, is the best work of my life. But in some curious way—I wonderwill you
understand me?—his personality has suggested to me an entirelynew manner in art,
an entirely new mode of style. I see thingsdifferently, I think of them
differently. I can now recreate life in away that was hidden from me before. ‘A
dream of form in days ofthought’—who is it who says that? I forget; but it is
what Dorian Grayhas been to me. The merely visible presence of this lad—for he
seems tome little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty—his
merelyvisible presence—ah! I wonder can you realize all that that
means?Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school, a schoolthat
is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all theperfection of
the spirit that is Greek. The harmony of soul andbody—how much that is! We in
our madness have separated the two, andhave invented a realism that is vulgar,
an ideality that is void.Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me! You
remember thatlandscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price
butwhich I would not part with? It is one of the best things I have everdone.
And why is it so? Because, while I was painting it, Dorian Graysat beside me.
Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and for thefirst time in my life I
saw in the plain woodland the wonder I hadalways looked for and always
missed.”“Basil, this is extraordinary! I must see Dorian Gray.”Hallward got up
from the seat and walked up and down the garden. Aftersome time he came back.
“Harry,” he said, “Dorian Gray is to me simplya motive in art. You might see
nothing in him. I see everything in him.He is never more present in my work than
when no image of him is there.He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new
manner. I find him in thecurves of certain lines, in the loveliness and
subtleties of certaincolours. That is all.”“Then why won’t you exhibit his
portrait?” asked Lord Henry.“Because, without intending it, I have put into it
some expression ofall this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I
have nevercared to speak to him. He knows nothing about it. He shall never
knowanything about it. But the world might guess it, and I will not bare mysoul
to their shallow prying eyes. My heart shall never be put undertheir microscope.
There is too much of myself in the thing, Harry—toomuch of myself!”“Poets are
not so scrupulous as you are. They know how useful passionis for publication.
Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions.”“I hate them for it,” cried
Hallward. “An artist should createbeautiful things, but should put nothing of
his own life into them. Welive in an age when men treat art as if it were meant
to be a form ofautobiography. We have lost the abstract sense of beauty. Some
day Iwill show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shallnever
see my portrait of Dorian Gray.”“I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won’t argue
with you. It is onlythe intellectually lost who ever argue. Tell me, is Dorian
Gray veryfond of you?”The painter considered for a few moments. “He likes me,”
he answeredafter a pause; “I know he likes me. Of course I flatter him
dreadfully.I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I know I
shallbe sorry for having said. As a rule, he is charming to me, and we sitin the
studio and talk of a thousand things. Now and then, however, heis horribly
thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight in giving mepain. Then I feel,
Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to someone who treats it as if it
were a flower to put in his coat, a bit ofdecoration to charm his vanity, an
ornament for a summer’s day.”“Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger,”
murmured Lord Henry.“Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will. It is a sad
thing to thinkof, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty.
Thataccounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educateourselves.
In the wild struggle for existence, we want to havesomething that endures, and
so we fill our minds with rubbish andfacts, in the silly hope of keeping our
place. The thoroughlywell-informed man—that is the modern ideal. And the mind of
thethoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. It is like a_bric-à-brac_
shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced aboveits proper value. I
think you will tire first, all the same. Some dayyou will look at your friend,
and he will seem to you to be a littleout of drawing, or you won’t like his tone
of colour, or something. Youwill bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and
seriously think thathe has behaved very badly to you. The next time he calls,
you will beperfectly cold and indifferent. It will be a great pity, for it
willalter you. What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance of artone
might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind isthat it leaves
one so unromantic.”“Harry, don’t talk like that. As long as I live, the
personality ofDorian Gray will dominate me. You can’t feel what I feel. You
changetoo often.”“Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it. Those
who arefaithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless whoknow
love’s tragedies.” And Lord Henry struck a light on a daintysilver case and
began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious andsatisfied air, as if he had
summed up the world in a phrase. There wasa rustle of chirruping sparrows in the
green lacquer leaves of the ivy,and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves
across the grass likeswallows. How pleasant it was in the garden! And how
delightful otherpeople’s emotions were!—much more delightful than their ideas,
itseemed to him. One’s own soul, and the passions of one’s friends—thosewere the
fascinating things in life. He pictured to himself with silentamusement the
tedious luncheon that he had missed by staying so longwith Basil Hallward. Had
he gone to his aunt’s, he would have been sureto have met Lord Goodbody there,
and the whole conversation would havebeen about the feeding of the poor and the
necessity for modellodging-houses. Each class would have preached the importance
of thosevirtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity in their own
lives.The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift, and the idle
growneloquent over the dignity of labour. It was charming to have escapedall
that! As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike him. Heturned to
Hallward and said, “My dear fellow, I have just remembered.”“Remembered what,
Harry?”“Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray.”“Where was it?” asked Hallward,
with a slight frown.“Don’t look so angry, Basil. It was at my aunt, Lady
Agatha’s. She toldme she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to
help herin the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray. I am bound to
statethat she never told me he was good-looking. Women have no appreciationof
good looks; at least, good women have not. She said that he was veryearnest and
had a beautiful nature. I at once pictured to myself acreature with spectacles
and lank hair, horribly freckled, and trampingabout on huge feet. I wish I had
known it was your friend.”“I am very glad you didn’t, Harry.”“Why?”“I don’t want
you to meet him.”“You don’t want me to meet him?”“No.”“Mr. Dorian Gray is in the
studio, sir,” said the butler, coming intothe garden.“You must introduce me
now,” cried Lord Henry, laughing.The painter turned to his servant, who stood
blinking in the sunlight.“Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker: I shall be in in a few
moments.” The manbowed and went up the walk.Then he looked at Lord Henry.
“Dorian Gray is my dearest friend,” hesaid. “He has a simple and a beautiful
nature. Your aunt was quiteright in what she said of him. Don’t spoil him. Don’t
try to influencehim. Your influence would be bad. The world is wide, and has
manymarvellous people in it. Don’t take away from me the one person whogives to
my art whatever charm it possesses: my life as an artistdepends on him. Mind,
Harry, I trust you.” He spoke very slowly, andthe words seemed wrung out of him
almost against his will.“What nonsense you talk!” said Lord Henry, smiling, and
taking Hallwardby the arm, he almost led him into the house.CHAPTER II.As they
entered they saw Dorian Gray. He was seated at the piano, withhis back to them,
turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann’s“Forest Scenes.” “You must lend
me these, Basil,” he cried. “I want tolearn them. They are perfectly
charming.”“That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian.”“Oh, I am tired
of sitting, and I don’t want a life-sized portrait ofmyself,” answered the lad,
swinging round on the music-stool in awilful, petulant manner. When he caught
sight of Lord Henry, a faintblush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he
started up. “I beg yourpardon, Basil, but I didn’t know you had any one with
you.”“This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine. Ihave
just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now youhave spoiled
everything.”“You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray,” said
LordHenry, stepping forward and extending his hand. “My aunt has oftenspoken to
me about you. You are one of her favourites, and, I amafraid, one of her victims
also.”“I am in Lady Agatha’s black books at present,” answered Dorian with
afunny look of penitence. “I promised to go to a club in Whitechapelwith her
last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it. We were tohave played a duet
together—three duets, I believe. I don’t know whatshe will say to me. I am far
too frightened to call.”“Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt. She is quite
devoted to you.And I don’t think it really matters about your not being there.
Theaudience probably thought it was a duet. When Aunt Agatha sits down tothe
piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people.”“That is very horrid to her,
and not very nice to me,” answered Dorian,laughing.Lord Henry looked at him.
Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome,with his finely curved scarlet lips,
his frank blue eyes, his crispgold hair. There was something in his face that
made one trust him atonce. All the candour of youth was there, as well as all
youth’spassionate purity. One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from
theworld. No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.“You are too charming to go in
for philanthropy, Mr. Gray—far toocharming.” And Lord Henry flung himself down
on the divan and openedhis cigarette-case.The painter had been busy mixing his
colours and getting his brushesready. He was looking worried, and when he heard
Lord Henry’s lastremark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then
said,“Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day. Would you think itawfully
rude of me if I asked you to go away?”Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian
Gray. “Am I to go, Mr. Gray?” heasked.“Oh, please don’t, Lord Henry. I see that
Basil is in one of his sulkymoods, and I can’t bear him when he sulks. Besides,
I want you to tellme why I should not go in for philanthropy.”“I don’t know that
I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray. It is so tedious asubject that one would have
to talk seriously about it. But I certainlyshall not run away, now that you have
asked me to stop. You don’treally mind, Basil, do you? You have often told me
that you liked yoursitters to have some one to chat to.”Hallward bit his lip.
“If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay.Dorian’s whims are laws to
everybody, except himself.”Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves. “You are very
pressing, Basil,but I am afraid I must go. I have promised to meet a man at
theOrleans. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Come and see me some afternoon in CurzonStreet.
I am nearly always at home at five o’clock. Write to me whenyou are coming. I
should be sorry to miss you.”“Basil,” cried Dorian Gray, “if Lord Henry Wotton
goes, I shall go,too. You never open your lips while you are painting, and it
ishorribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant. Askhim to
stay. I insist upon it.”“Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me,” said
Hallward,gazing intently at his picture. “It is quite true, I never talk when
Iam working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tediousfor my
unfortunate sitters. I beg you to stay.”“But what about my man at the
Orleans?”The painter laughed. “I don’t think there will be any difficulty
aboutthat. Sit down again, Harry. And now, Dorian, get up on the platform,and
don’t move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henrysays. He has a
very bad influence over all his friends, with the singleexception of
myself.”Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greekmartyr,
and made a little _moue_ of discontent to Lord Henry, to whomhe had rather taken
a fancy. He was so unlike Basil. They made adelightful contrast. And he had such
a beautiful voice. After a fewmoments he said to him, “Have you really a very
bad influence, LordHenry? As bad as Basil says?”“There is no such thing as a
good influence, Mr. Gray. All influence isimmoral—immoral from the scientific
point of view.”“Why?”“Because to influence a person is to give him one’s own
soul. He doesnot think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions.
Hisvirtues are not real to him. His sins, if there are such things assins, are
borrowed. He becomes an echo of some one else’s music, anactor of a part that
has not been written for him. The aim of life isself-development. To realize
one’s nature perfectly—that is what eachof us is here for. People are afraid of
themselves, nowadays. They haveforgotten the highest of all duties, the duty
that one owes to one’sself. Of course, they are charitable. They feed the hungry
and clothethe beggar. But their own souls starve, and are naked. Courage has
goneout of our race. Perhaps we never really had it. The terror of society,which
is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret ofreligion—these
are the two things that govern us. And yet—”“Just turn your head a little more
to the right, Dorian, like a goodboy,” said the painter, deep in his work and
conscious only that a lookhad come into the lad’s face that he had never seen
there before.“And yet,” continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and
withthat graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic ofhim, and
that he had even in his Eton days, “I believe that if one manwere to live out
his life fully and completely, were to give form toevery feeling, expression to
every thought, reality to every dream—Ibelieve that the world would gain such a
fresh impulse of joy that wewould forget all the maladies of mediævalism, and
return to theHellenic ideal—to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal,
itmay be. But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself. Themutilation of
the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denialthat mars our lives. We are
punished for our refusals. Every impulsethat we strive to strangle broods in the
mind and poisons us. The bodysins once, and has done with its sin, for action is
a mode ofpurification. Nothing remains then but the recollection of a
pleasure,or the luxury of a regret. The only way to get rid of a temptation isto
yield to it. Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing forthe things it
has forbidden to itself, with desire for what itsmonstrous laws have made
monstrous and unlawful. It has been said thatthe great events of the world take
place in the brain. It is in thebrain, and the brain only, that the great sins
of the world take placealso. You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red
youth and yourrose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you
afraid,thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleepingdreams
whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame—”“Stop!” faltered Dorian
Gray, “stop! you bewilder me. I don’t know whatto say. There is some answer to
you, but I cannot find it. Don’t speak.Let me think. Or, rather, let me try not
to think.”For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips
andeyes strangely bright. He was dimly conscious that entirely freshinfluences
were at work within him. Yet they seemed to him to have comereally from himself.
The few words that Basil’s friend had said tohim—words spoken by chance, no
doubt, and with wilful paradox inthem—had touched some secret chord that had
never been touched before,but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to
curious pulses.Music had stirred him like that. Music had troubled him many
times. Butmusic was not articulate. It was not a new world, but rather
anotherchaos, that it created in us. Words! Mere words! How terrible theywere!
How clear, and vivid, and cruel! One could not escape from them.And yet what a
subtle magic there was in them! They seemed to be ableto give a plastic form to
formless things, and to have a music of theirown as sweet as that of viol or of
lute. Mere words! Was there anythingso real as words?Yes; there had been things
in his boyhood that he had not understood.He understood them now. Life suddenly
became fiery-coloured to him. Itseemed to him that he had been walking in fire.
Why had he not knownit?With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him. He knew
the precisepsychological moment when to say nothing. He felt intensely
interested.He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had
produced,and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen, a
bookwhich had revealed to him much that he had not known before, hewondered
whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience.He had merely shot
an arrow into the air. Had it hit the mark? Howfascinating the lad was!Hallward
painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that hadthe true refinement
and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comesonly from strength. He was
unconscious of the silence.“Basil, I am tired of standing,” cried Dorian Gray
suddenly. “I must goout and sit in the garden. The air is stifling here.”“My
dear fellow, I am so sorry. When I am painting, I can’t think ofanything else.
But you never sat better. You were perfectly still. AndI have caught the effect
I wanted—the half-parted lips and the brightlook in the eyes. I don’t know what
Harry has been saying to you, buthe has certainly made you have the most
wonderful expression. I supposehe has been paying you compliments. You mustn’t
believe a word that hesays.”“He has certainly not been paying me compliments.
Perhaps that is thereason that I don’t believe anything he has told me.”“You
know you believe it all,” said Lord Henry, looking at him with hisdreamy
languorous eyes. “I will go out to the garden with you. It ishorribly hot in the
studio. Basil, let us have something iced to drink,something with strawberries
in it.”“Certainly, Harry. Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I willtell
him what you want. I have got to work up this background, so Iwill join you
later on. Don’t keep Dorian too long. I have never beenin better form for
painting than I am to-day. This is going to be mymasterpiece. It is my
masterpiece as it stands.”Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian
Gray burying hisface in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in
theirperfume as if it had been wine. He came close to him and put his handupon
his shoulder. “You are quite right to do that,” he murmured.“Nothing can cure
the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure thesenses but the soul.”The
lad started and drew back. He was bareheaded, and the leaves hadtossed his
rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads. Therewas a look of fear
in his eyes, such as people have when they aresuddenly awakened. His finely
chiselled nostrils quivered, and somehidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips
and left them trembling.“Yes,” continued Lord Henry, “that is one of the great
secrets oflife—to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by
meansof the soul. You are a wonderful creation. You know more than you thinkyou
know, just as you know less than you want to know.”Dorian Gray frowned and
turned his head away. He could not help likingthe tall, graceful young man who
was standing by him. His romantic,olive-coloured face and worn expression
interested him. There wassomething in his low languid voice that was absolutely
fascinating. Hiscool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm. They
moved,as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their own.But he
felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid. Why had it beenleft for a
stranger to reveal him to himself? He had known BasilHallward for months, but
the friendship between them had never alteredhim. Suddenly there had come some
one across his life who seemed tohave disclosed to him life’s mystery. And, yet,
what was there to beafraid of? He was not a schoolboy or a girl. It was absurd
to befrightened.“Let us go and sit in the shade,” said Lord Henry. “Parker has
broughtout the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will
bequite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again. You really mustnot allow
yourself to become sunburnt. It would be unbecoming.”“What can it matter?” cried
Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down onthe seat at the end of the garden.“It
should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray.”“Why?”“Because you have the most
marvellous youth, and youth is the one thingworth having.”“I don’t feel that,
Lord Henry.”“No, you don’t feel it now. Some day, when you are old and wrinkled
andugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and
passionbranded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you willfeel
it terribly. Now, wherever you go, you charm the world. Will italways be so? ...
You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr. Gray.Don’t frown. You have. And
beauty is a form of genius—is higher,indeed, than genius, as it needs no
explanation. It is of the greatfacts of the world, like sunlight, or
spring-time, or the reflection indark waters of that silver shell we call the
moon. It cannot bequestioned. It has its divine right of sovereignty. It makes
princes ofthose who have it. You smile? Ah! when you have lost it you
won’tsmile.... People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial. Thatmay be
so, but at least it is not so superficial as thought is. To me,beauty is the
wonder of wonders. It is only shallow people who do notjudge by appearances. The
true mystery of the world is the visible, notthe invisible.... Yes, Mr. Gray,
the gods have been good to you. Butwhat the gods give they quickly take away.
You have only a few years inwhich to live really, perfectly, and fully. When
your youth goes, yourbeauty will go with it, and then you will suddenly discover
that thereare no triumphs left for you, or have to content yourself with
thosemean triumphs that the memory of your past will make more bitter
thandefeats. Every month as it wanes brings you nearer to somethingdreadful.
Time is jealous of you, and wars against your lilies and yourroses. You will
become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed. Youwill suffer horribly....
Ah! realize your youth while you have it.Don’t squander the gold of your days,
listening to the tedious, tryingto improve the hopeless failure, or giving away
your life to theignorant, the common, and the vulgar. These are the sickly aims,
thefalse ideals, of our age. Live! Live the wonderful life that is in you!Let
nothing be lost upon you. Be always searching for new sensations.Be afraid of
nothing.... A new Hedonism—that is what our century wants.You might be its
visible symbol. With your personality there is nothingyou could not do. The
world belongs to you for a season.... The momentI met you I saw that you were
quite unconscious of what you really are,of what you really might be. There was
so much in you that charmed methat I felt I must tell you something about
yourself. I thought howtragic it would be if you were wasted. For there is such
a little timethat your youth will last—such a little time. The common
hill-flowerswither, but they blossom again. The laburnum will be as yellow
nextJune as it is now. In a month there will be purple stars on theclematis, and
year after year the green night of its leaves will holdits purple stars. But we
never get back our youth. The pulse of joythat beats in us at twenty becomes
sluggish. Our limbs fail, our sensesrot. We degenerate into hideous puppets,
haunted by the memory of thepassions of which we were too much afraid, and the
exquisitetemptations that we had not the courage to yield to. Youth! Youth!There
is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!”Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed
and wondering. The spray of lilac fellfrom his hand upon the gravel. A furry bee
came and buzzed round it fora moment. Then it began to scramble all over the
oval stellated globeof the tiny blossoms. He watched it with that strange
interest intrivial things that we try to develop when things of high import
makeus afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which wecannot
find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us layssudden siege to the
brain and calls on us to yield. After a time thebee flew away. He saw it
creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrianconvolvulus. The flower seemed to
quiver, and then swayed gently to andfro.Suddenly the painter appeared at the
door of the studio and madestaccato signs for them to come in. They turned to
each other andsmiled.“I am waiting,” he cried. “Do come in. The light is quite
perfect, andyou can bring your drinks.”They rose up and sauntered down the walk
together. Two green-and-whitebutterflies fluttered past them, and in the
pear-tree at the corner ofthe garden a thrush began to sing.“You are glad you
have met me, Mr. Gray,” said Lord Henry, looking athim.“Yes, I am glad now. I
wonder shall I always be glad?”“Always! That is a dreadful word. It makes me
shudder when I hear it.Women are so fond of using it. They spoil every romance
by trying tomake it last for ever. It is a meaningless word, too. The
onlydifference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the capricelasts
a little longer.”As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord
Henry’sarm. “In that case, let our friendship be a caprice,” he
murmured,flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform
andresumed his pose.Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and
watched him.The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound
thatbroke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped backto look
at his work from a distance. In the slanting beams thatstreamed through the open
doorway the dust danced and was golden. Theheavy scent of the roses seemed to
brood over everything.After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped
painting, looked fora long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the
picture,biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning. “It is
quitefinished,” he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name inlong
vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.Lord Henry came over and
examined the picture. It was certainly awonderful work of art, and a wonderful
likeness as well.“My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly,” he said. “It
is thefinest portrait of modern times. Mr. Gray, come over and look
atyourself.”The lad started, as if awakened from some dream.“Is it really
finished?” he murmured, stepping down from the platform.“Quite finished,” said
the painter. “And you have sat splendidlyto-day. I am awfully obliged to
you.”“That is entirely due to me,” broke in Lord Henry. “Isn’t it,
Mr.Gray?”Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his pictureand
turned towards it. When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeksflushed for a
moment with pleasure. A look of joy came into his eyes,as if he had recognized
himself for the first time. He stood theremotionless and in wonder, dimly
conscious that Hallward was speaking tohim, but not catching the meaning of his
words. The sense of his ownbeauty came on him like a revelation. He had never
felt it before.Basil Hallward’s compliments had seemed to him to be merely
thecharming exaggeration of friendship. He had listened to them, laughedat them,
forgotten them. They had not influenced his nature. Then hadcome Lord Henry
Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, histerrible warning of its brevity.
That had stirred him at the time, andnow, as he stood gazing at the shadow of
his own loveliness, the fullreality of the description flashed across him. Yes,
there would be aday when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim
andcolourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed. The scarletwould
pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair. Thelife that was to
make his soul would mar his body. He would becomedreadful, hideous, and
uncouth.As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like aknife
and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver. His eyesdeepened into
amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears. He feltas if a hand of ice had
been laid upon his heart.“Don’t you like it?” cried Hallward at last, stung a
little by thelad’s silence, not understanding what it meant.“Of course he likes
it,” said Lord Henry. “Who wouldn’t like it? It isone of the greatest things in
modern art. I will give you anything youlike to ask for it. I must have it.”“It
is not my property, Harry.”“Whose property is it?”“Dorian’s, of course,”
answered the painter.“He is a very lucky fellow.”“How sad it is!” murmured
Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed uponhis own portrait. “How sad it is! I
shall grow old, and horrible, anddreadful. But this picture will remain always
young. It will never beolder than this particular day of June.... If it were
only the otherway! If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that
wasto grow old! For that—for that—I would give everything! Yes, there isnothing
in the whole world I would not give! I would give my soul forthat!”“You would
hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil,” cried LordHenry, laughing. “It
would be rather hard lines on your work.”“I should object very strongly, Harry,”
said Hallward.Dorian Gray turned and looked at him. “I believe you would, Basil.
Youlike your art better than your friends. I am no more to you than agreen
bronze figure. Hardly as much, I dare say.”The painter stared in amazement. It
was so unlike Dorian to speak likethat. What had happened? He seemed quite
angry. His face was flushedand his cheeks burning.“Yes,” he continued, “I am
less to you than your ivory Hermes or yoursilver Faun. You will like them
always. How long will you like me? TillI have my first wrinkle, I suppose. I
know, now, that when one losesone’s good looks, whatever they may be, one loses
everything. Yourpicture has taught me that. Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly
right. Youthis the only thing worth having. When I find that I am growing old,
Ishall kill myself.”Hallward turned pale and caught his hand. “Dorian! Dorian!”
he cried,“don’t talk like that. I have never had such a friend as you, and
Ishall never have such another. You are not jealous of material things,are
you?—you who are finer than any of them!”“I am jealous of everything whose
beauty does not die. I am jealous ofthe portrait you have painted of me. Why
should it keep what I mustlose? Every moment that passes takes something from me
and givessomething to it. Oh, if it were only the other way! If the picturecould
change, and I could be always what I am now! Why did you paintit? It will mock
me some day—mock me horribly!” The hot tears welledinto his eyes; he tore his
hand away and, flinging himself on thedivan, he buried his face in the cushions,
as though he was praying.“This is your doing, Harry,” said the painter
bitterly.Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “It is the real Dorian Gray—that
isall.”“It is not.”“If it is not, what have I to do with it?”“You should have
gone away when I asked you,” he muttered.“I stayed when you asked me,” was Lord
Henry’s answer.“Harry, I can’t quarrel with my two best friends at once, but
betweenyou both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have everdone,
and I will destroy it. What is it but canvas and colour? I willnot let it come
across our three lives and mar them.”Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the
pillow, and with pallidface and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked
over to the dealpainting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window.
What washe doing there? His fingers were straying about among the litter of
tintubes and dry brushes, seeking for something. Yes, it was for the
longpalette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel. He had found it atlast.
He was going to rip up the canvas.With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the
couch, and, rushing over toHallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung
it to the end ofthe studio. “Don’t, Basil, don’t!” he cried. “It would be
murder!”“I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian,” said the
paintercoldly when he had recovered from his surprise. “I never thought
youwould.”“Appreciate it? I am in love with it, Basil. It is part of myself.
Ifeel that.”“Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed,
andsent home. Then you can do what you like with yourself.” And he walkedacross
the room and rang the bell for tea. “You will have tea, ofcourse, Dorian? And so
will you, Harry? Or do you object to such simplepleasures?”“I adore simple
pleasures,” said Lord Henry. “They are the last refugeof the complex. But I
don’t like scenes, except on the stage. Whatabsurd fellows you are, both of you!
I wonder who it was defined man asa rational animal. It was the most premature
definition ever given. Manis many things, but he is not rational. I am glad he
is not, afterall—though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture.
Youhad much better let me have it, Basil. This silly boy doesn’t reallywant it,
and I really do.”“If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never
forgive you!”cried Dorian Gray; “and I don’t allow people to call me a silly
boy.”“You know the picture is yours, Dorian. I gave it to you before
itexisted.”“And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that
youdon’t really object to being reminded that you are extremely young.”“I should
have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry.”“Ah! this morning! You
have lived since then.”There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered
with a ladentea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table. There was
arattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn.Two
globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page. Dorian Graywent over and
poured out the tea. The two men sauntered languidly tothe table and examined
what was under the covers.“Let us go to the theatre to-night,” said Lord Henry.
“There is sure tobe something on, somewhere. I have promised to dine at White’s,
but itis only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I amill,
or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequentengagement. I
think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would haveall the surprise of
candour.”“It is such a bore putting on one’s dress-clothes,” muttered
Hallward.“And, when one has them on, they are so horrid.”“Yes,” answered Lord
Henry dreamily, “the costume of the nineteenthcentury is detestable. It is so
sombre, so depressing. Sin is the onlyreal colour-element left in modern
life.”“You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry.”“Before
which Dorian? The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the onein the
picture?”“Before either.”“I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord
Henry,” said thelad.“Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won’t
you?”“I can’t, really. I would sooner not. I have a lot of work to do.”“Well,
then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray.”“I should like that awfully.”The
painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture.“I shall stay
with the real Dorian,” he said, sadly.“Is it the real Dorian?” cried the
original of the portrait, strollingacross to him. “Am I really like that?”“Yes;
you are just like that.”“How wonderful, Basil!”“At least you are like it in
appearance. But it will never alter,”sighed Hallward. “That is something.”“What
a fuss people make about fidelity!” exclaimed Lord Henry. “Why,even in love it
is purely a question for physiology. It has nothing todo with our own will.
Young men want to be faithful, and are not; oldmen want to be faithless, and
cannot: that is all one can say.”“Don’t go to the theatre to-night, Dorian,”
said Hallward. “Stop anddine with me.”“I can’t, Basil.”“Why?”“Because I have
promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him.”“He won’t like you the better for
keeping your promises. He alwaysbreaks his own. I beg you not to go.”Dorian Gray
laughed and shook his head.“I entreat you.”The lad hesitated, and looked over at
Lord Henry, who was watching themfrom the tea-table with an amused smile.“I must
go, Basil,” he answered.“Very well,” said Hallward, and he went over and laid
down his cup onthe tray. “It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had
betterlose no time. Good-bye, Harry. Good-bye, Dorian. Come and see me soon.Come
to-morrow.”“Certainly.”“You won’t forget?”“No, of course not,” cried Dorian.“And
... Harry!”“Yes, Basil?”“Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden
this morning.”“I have forgotten it.”“I trust you.”“I wish I could trust myself,”
said Lord Henry, laughing. “Come, Mr.Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop
you at your own place.Good-bye, Basil. It has been a most interesting
afternoon.”As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on
asofa, and a look of pain came into his face.CHAPTER III.At half-past twelve
next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from CurzonStreet over to the Albany to call
on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genialif somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom
the outside world calledselfish because it derived no particular benefit from
him, but who wasconsidered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused
him. Hisfather had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young andPrim
unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in acapricious moment
of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy atParis, a post to which he
considered that he was fully entitled byreason of his birth, his indolence, the
good English of his dispatches,and his inordinate passion for pleasure. The son,
who had been hisfather’s secretary, had resigned along with his chief,
somewhatfoolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some monthslater
to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the greataristocratic art
of doing absolutely nothing. He had two large townhouses, but preferred to live
in chambers as it was less trouble, andtook most of his meals at his club. He
paid some attention to themanagement of his collieries in the Midland counties,
excusing himselffor this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage
ofhaving coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency ofburning
wood on his own hearth. In politics he was a Tory, except whenthe Tories were in
office, during which period he roundly abused themfor being a pack of Radicals.
He was a hero to his valet, who bulliedhim, and a terror to most of his
relations, whom he bullied in turn.Only England could have produced him, and he
always said that thecountry was going to the dogs. His principles were out of
date, butthere was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.When Lord Henry
entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a roughshooting-coat, smoking a
cheroot and grumbling over _The Times_. “Well,Harry,” said the old gentleman,
“what brings you out so early? Ithought you dandies never got up till two, and
were not visible tillfive.”“Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George. I
want to getsomething out of you.”“Money, I suppose,” said Lord Fermor, making a
wry face. “Well, sitdown and tell me all about it. Young people, nowadays,
imagine thatmoney is everything.”“Yes,” murmured Lord Henry, settling his
button-hole in his coat; “andwhen they grow older they know it. But I don’t want
money. It is onlypeople who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I
never paymine. Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives
charminglyupon it. Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor’s tradesmen,
andconsequently they never bother me. What I want is information: notuseful
information, of course; useless information.”“Well, I can tell you anything that
is in an English Blue Book, Harry,although those fellows nowadays write a lot of
nonsense. When I was inthe Diplomatic, things were much better. But I hear they
let them innow by examination. What can you expect? Examinations, sir, are
purehumbug from beginning to end. If a man is a gentleman, he knows quiteenough,
and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad forhim.”“Mr. Dorian Gray
does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George,” saidLord Henry languidly.“Mr.
Dorian Gray? Who is he?” asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushywhite
eyebrows.“That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George. Or rather, I know
whohe is. He is the last Lord Kelso’s grandson. His mother was a Devereux,Lady
Margaret Devereux. I want you to tell me about his mother. Whatwas she like?
Whom did she marry? You have known nearly everybody inyour time, so you might
have known her. I am very much interested inMr. Gray at present. I have only
just met him.”“Kelso’s grandson!” echoed the old gentleman. “Kelso’s grandson!
... Ofcourse.... I knew his mother intimately. I believe I was at
herchristening. She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, MargaretDevereux, and
made all the men frantic by running away with a pennilessyoung fellow—a mere
nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, orsomething of that kind.
Certainly. I remember the whole thing as if ithappened yesterday. The poor chap
was killed in a duel at Spa a fewmonths after the marriage. There was an ugly
story about it. They saidKelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute,
to insult hisson-in-law in public—paid him, sir, to do it, paid him—and that
thefellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon. The thing was hushedup,
but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some timeafterwards. He
brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and shenever spoke to him again.
Oh, yes; it was a bad business. The girldied, too, died within a year. So she
left a son, did she? I hadforgotten that. What sort of boy is he? If he is like
his mother, hemust be a good-looking chap.”“He is very good-looking,” assented
Lord Henry.“I hope he will fall into proper hands,” continued the old man.
“Heshould have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thingby
him. His mother had money, too. All the Selby property came to her,through her
grandfather. Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him amean dog. He was, too.
Came to Madrid once when I was there. Egad, Iwas ashamed of him. The Queen used
to ask me about the English noblewho was always quarrelling with the cabmen
about their fares. They madequite a story of it. I didn’t dare show my face at
Court for a month. Ihope he treated his grandson better than he did the
jarvies.”“I don’t know,” answered Lord Henry. “I fancy that the boy will be
welloff. He is not of age yet. He has Selby, I know. He told me so. And ...his
mother was very beautiful?”“Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures
I ever saw,Harry. What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never
couldunderstand. She could have married anybody she chose. Carlington wasmad
after her. She was romantic, though. All the women of that familywere. The men
were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful.Carlington went on his
knees to her. Told me so himself. She laughed athim, and there wasn’t a girl in
London at the time who wasn’t afterhim. And by the way, Harry, talking about
silly marriages, what is thishumbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting
to marry anAmerican? Ain’t English girls good enough for him?”“It is rather
fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George.”“I’ll back English women
against the world, Harry,” said Lord Fermor,striking the table with his
fist.“The betting is on the Americans.”“They don’t last, I am told,” muttered
his uncle.“A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at
asteeplechase. They take things flying. I don’t think Dartmoor has achance.”“Who
are her people?” grumbled the old gentleman. “Has she got any?”Lord Henry shook
his head. “American girls are as clever at concealingtheir parents, as English
women are at concealing their past,” he said,rising to go.“They are
pork-packers, I suppose?”“I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor’s sake. I am
told thatpork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America,
afterpolitics.”“Is she pretty?”“She behaves as if she was beautiful. Most
American women do. It is thesecret of their charm.”“Why can’t these American
women stay in their own country? They arealways telling us that it is the
paradise for women.”“It is. That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so
excessivelyanxious to get out of it,” said Lord Henry. “Good-bye, Uncle George.
Ishall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer. Thanks for giving me
theinformation I wanted. I always like to know everything about my newfriends,
and nothing about my old ones.”“Where are you lunching, Harry?”“At Aunt
Agatha’s. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray. He is her latest_protégé_.”“Humph!
tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more withher charity appeals.
I am sick of them. Why, the good woman thinks thatI have nothing to do but to
write cheques for her silly fads.”“All right, Uncle George, I’ll tell her, but
it won’t have any effect.Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. It is
theirdistinguishing characteristic.”The old gentleman growled approvingly and
rang the bell for hisservant. Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into
Burlington Street andturned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.So
that was the story of Dorian Gray’s parentage. Crudely as it hadbeen told to
him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of astrange, almost modern
romance. A beautiful woman risking everythingfor a mad passion. A few wild weeks
of happiness cut short by ahideous, treacherous crime. Months of voiceless
agony, and then a childborn in pain. The mother snatched away by death, the boy
left tosolitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man. Yes; it was
aninteresting background. It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as itwere.
Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was somethingtragic. Worlds had
to be in travail, that the meanest flower mightblow.... And how charming he had
been at dinner the night before, aswith startled eyes and lips parted in
frightened pleasure he had satopposite to him at the club, the red candleshades
staining to a richerrose the wakening wonder of his face. Talking to him was
like playingupon an exquisite violin. He answered to every touch and thrill of
thebow.... There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise ofinfluence.
No other activity was like it. To project one’s soul intosome gracious form, and
let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one’sown intellectual views echoed back
to one with all the added music ofpassion and youth; to convey one’s temperament
into another as thoughit were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a
real joy inthat—perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so
limitedand vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, andgrossly
common in its aims.... He was a marvellous type, too, this lad,whom by so
curious a chance he had met in Basil’s studio, or could befashioned into a
marvellous type, at any rate. Grace was his, and thewhite purity of boyhood, and
beauty such as old Greek marbles kept forus. There was nothing that one could
not do with him. He could be madea Titan or a toy. What a pity it was that such
beauty was destined tofade! ... And Basil? From a psychological point of view,
howinteresting he was! The new manner in art, the fresh mode of looking atlife,
suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence of one whowas unconscious
of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in dimwoodland, and walked unseen in
open field, suddenly showing herself,Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his
soul who sought for her therehad been wakened that wonderful vision to which
alone are wonderfulthings revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things
becoming, as itwere, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value, as though
theywere themselves patterns of some other and more perfect form whoseshadow
they made real: how strange it all was! He remembered somethinglike it in
history. Was it not Plato, that artist in thought, who hadfirst analyzed it? Was
it not Buonarotti who had carved it in thecoloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence?
But in our own century it wasstrange.... Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray
what, withoutknowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned the
wonderfulportrait. He would seek to dominate him—had already, indeed, half
doneso. He would make that wonderful spirit his own. There was
somethingfascinating in this son of love and death.Suddenly he stopped and
glanced up at the houses. He found that he hadpassed his aunt’s some distance,
and, smiling to himself, turned back.When he entered the somewhat sombre hall,
the butler told him that theyhad gone in to lunch. He gave one of the footmen
his hat and stick andpassed into the dining-room.“Late as usual, Harry,” cried
his aunt, shaking her head at him.He invented a facile excuse, and having taken
the vacant seat next toher, looked round to see who was there. Dorian bowed to
him shyly fromthe end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his
cheek.Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature
andgood temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those
amplearchitectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses aredescribed
by contemporary historians as stoutness. Next to her sat, onher right, Sir
Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, whofollowed his leader in public
life and in private life followed thebest cooks, dining with the Tories and
thinking with the Liberals, inaccordance with a wise and well-known rule. The
post on her left wasoccupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of
considerablecharm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of
silence,having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that hehad
to say before he was thirty. His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur,one of his
aunt’s oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but sodreadfully dowdy
that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.Fortunately for him she had on
the other side Lord Faudel, a mostintelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as
a ministerial statementin the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in
that intenselyearnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked
oncehimself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none ofthem
ever quite escape.“We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry,” cried the
duchess,nodding pleasantly to him across the table. “Do you think he willreally
marry this fascinating young person?”“I believe she has made up her mind to
propose to him, Duchess.”“How dreadful!” exclaimed Lady Agatha. “Really, some
one shouldinterfere.”“I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps
an Americandry-goods store,” said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.“My
uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas.”“Dry-goods! What are
American dry-goods?” asked the duchess, raisingher large hands in wonder and
accentuating the verb.“American novels,” answered Lord Henry, helping himself to
some quail.The duchess looked puzzled.“Don’t mind him, my dear,” whispered Lady
Agatha. “He never meansanything that he says.”“When America was discovered,”
said the Radical member—and he began togive some wearisome facts. Like all
people who try to exhaust asubject, he exhausted his listeners. The duchess
sighed and exercisedher privilege of interruption. “I wish to goodness it never
had beendiscovered at all!” she exclaimed. “Really, our girls have no
chancenowadays. It is most unfair.”“Perhaps, after all, America never has been
discovered,” said Mr.Erskine; “I myself would say that it had merely been
detected.”“Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants,” answered
theduchess vaguely. “I must confess that most of them are extremelypretty. And
they dress well, too. They get all their dresses in Paris.I wish I could afford
to do the same.”“They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris,”
chuckled SirThomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour’s cast-off
clothes.“Really! And where do bad Americans go to when they die?” inquired
theduchess.“They go to America,” murmured Lord Henry.Sir Thomas frowned. “I am
afraid that your nephew is prejudiced againstthat great country,” he said to
Lady Agatha. “I have travelled all overit in cars provided by the directors,
who, in such matters, areextremely civil. I assure you that it is an education
to visit it.”“But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?” asked
Mr.Erskine plaintively. “I don’t feel up to the journey.”Sir Thomas waved his
hand. “Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world onhis shelves. We practical men
like to see things, not to read aboutthem. The Americans are an extremely
interesting people. They areabsolutely reasonable. I think that is their
distinguishingcharacteristic. Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people.
Iassure you there is no nonsense about the Americans.”“How dreadful!” cried Lord
Henry. “I can stand brute force, but brutereason is quite unbearable. There is
something unfair about its use. Itis hitting below the intellect.”“I do not
understand you,” said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.“I do, Lord Henry,”
murmured Mr. Erskine, with a smile.“Paradoxes are all very well in their
way....” rejoined the baronet.“Was that a paradox?” asked Mr. Erskine. “I did
not think so. Perhapsit was. Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. To
test realitywe must see it on the tight rope. When the verities become acrobats,
wecan judge them.”“Dear me!” said Lady Agatha, “how you men argue! I am sure I
never canmake out what you are talking about. Oh! Harry, I am quite vexed
withyou. Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up theEast
End? I assure you he would be quite invaluable. They would lovehis playing.”“I
want him to play to me,” cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he lookeddown the table
and caught a bright answering glance.“But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel,”
continued Lady Agatha.“I can sympathize with everything except suffering,” said
Lord Henry,shrugging his shoulders. “I cannot sympathize with that. It is
toougly, too horrible, too distressing. There is something terribly morbidin the
modern sympathy with pain. One should sympathize with thecolour, the beauty, the
joy of life. The less said about life’s sores,the better.”“Still, the East End
is a very important problem,” remarked Sir Thomaswith a grave shake of the
head.“Quite so,” answered the young lord. “It is the problem of slavery, andwe
try to solve it by amusing the slaves.”The politician looked at him keenly.
“What change do you propose,then?” he asked.Lord Henry laughed. “I don’t desire
to change anything in Englandexcept the weather,” he answered. “I am quite
content with philosophiccontemplation. But, as the nineteenth century has gone
bankrupt throughan over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should
appealto science to put us straight. The advantage of the emotions is thatthey
lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is notemotional.”“But we
have such grave responsibilities,” ventured Mrs. Vandeleurtimidly.“Terribly
grave,” echoed Lady Agatha.Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine. “Humanity
takes itself tooseriously. It is the world’s original sin. If the caveman had
known howto laugh, history would have been different.”“You are really very
comforting,” warbled the duchess. “I have alwaysfelt rather guilty when I came
to see your dear aunt, for I take nointerest at all in the East End. For the
future I shall be able to lookher in the face without a blush.”“A blush is very
becoming, Duchess,” remarked Lord Henry.“Only when one is young,” she answered.
“When an old woman like myselfblushes, it is a very bad sign. Ah! Lord Henry, I
wish you would tellme how to become young again.”He thought for a moment. “Can
you remember any great error that youcommitted in your early days, Duchess?” he
asked, looking at her acrossthe table.“A great many, I fear,” she cried.“Then
commit them over again,” he said gravely. “To get back one’syouth, one has
merely to repeat one’s follies.”“A delightful theory!” she exclaimed. “I must
put it into practice.”“A dangerous theory!” came from Sir Thomas’s tight lips.
Lady Agathashook her head, but could not help being amused. Mr. Erskine
listened.“Yes,” he continued, “that is one of the great secrets of life.Nowadays
most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, anddiscover when it is too
late that the only things one never regrets areone’s mistakes.”A laugh ran round
the table.He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air
andtransformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescentwith fancy
and winged it with paradox. The praise of folly, as he wenton, soared into a
philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, andcatching the mad music of
pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, herwine-stained robe and wreath of ivy,
danced like a Bacchante over thehills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for
being sober. Facts fledbefore her like frightened forest things. Her white feet
trod the hugepress at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose
roundher bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam overthe
vat’s black, dripping, sloping sides. It was an extraordinaryimprovisation. He
felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him,and the consciousness that
amongst his audience there was one whosetemperament he wished to fascinate
seemed to give his wit keenness andto lend colour to his imagination. He was
brilliant, fantastic,irresponsible. He charmed his listeners out of themselves,
and theyfollowed his pipe, laughing. Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him,but
sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lipsand wonder
growing grave in his darkening eyes.At last, liveried in the costume of the age,
reality entered the roomin the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her
carriage waswaiting. She wrung her hands in mock despair. “How annoying!”
shecried. “I must go. I have to call for my husband at the club, to takehim to
some absurd meeting at Willis’s Rooms, where he is going to bein the chair. If I
am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn’thave a scene in this bonnet. It
is far too fragile. A harsh word wouldruin it. No, I must go, dear Agatha.
Good-bye, Lord Henry, you arequite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing. I am
sure I don’t knowwhat to say about your views. You must come and dine with us
somenight. Tuesday? Are you disengaged Tuesday?”“For you I would throw over
anybody, Duchess,” said Lord Henry with abow.“Ah! that is very nice, and very
wrong of you,” she cried; “so mind youcome”; and she swept out of the room,
followed by Lady Agatha and theother ladies.When Lord Henry had sat down again,
Mr. Erskine moved round, and takinga chair close to him, placed his hand upon
his arm.“You talk books away,” he said; “why don’t you write one?”“I am too fond
of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine. Ishould like to write a
novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovelyas a Persian carpet and as
unreal. But there is no literary public inEngland for anything except
newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. Ofall people in the world the English
have the least sense of the beautyof literature.”“I fear you are right,”
answered Mr. Erskine. “I myself used to haveliterary ambitions, but I gave them
up long ago. And now, my dear youngfriend, if you will allow me to call you so,
may I ask if you reallymeant all that you said to us at lunch?”“I quite forget
what I said,” smiled Lord Henry. “Was it all very bad?”“Very bad indeed. In fact
I consider you extremely dangerous, and ifanything happens to our good duchess,
we shall all look on you as beingprimarily responsible. But I should like to
talk to you about life. Thegeneration into which I was born was tedious. Some
day, when you aretired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me
yourphilosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunateenough to
possess.”“I shall be charmed. A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege.
Ithas a perfect host, and a perfect library.”“You will complete it,” answered
the old gentleman with a courteousbow. “And now I must bid good-bye to your
excellent aunt. I am due atthe Athenaeum. It is the hour when we sleep
there.”“All of you, Mr. Erskine?”“Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. We are
practising for an EnglishAcademy of Letters.”Lord Henry laughed and rose. “I am
going to the park,” he cried.As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray
touched him on the arm.“Let me come with you,” he murmured.“But I thought you
had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,”answered Lord Henry.“I would
sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you. Do letme. And you will
promise to talk to me all the time? No one talks sowonderfully as you do.”“Ah! I
have talked quite enough for to-day,” said Lord Henry, smiling.“All I want now
is to look at life. You may come and look at it withme, if you care to.”CHAPTER
IV.One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a
luxuriousarm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry’s house in Mayfair.
Itwas, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelledwainscoting of
olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceilingof raised plasterwork,
and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk,long-fringed Persian rugs. On a
tiny satinwood table stood a statuetteby Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of
Les Cent Nouvelles, bound forMargaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with
the gilt daisiesthat Queen had selected for her device. Some large blue china
jars andparrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the
smallleaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of asummer
day in London.Lord Henry had not yet come in. He was always late on principle,
hisprinciple being that punctuality is the thief of time. So the lad waslooking
rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pagesof an elaborately
illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he hadfound in one of the book-cases.
The formal monotonous ticking of theLouis Quatorze clock annoyed him. Once or
twice he thought of goingaway.At last he heard a step outside, and the door
opened. “How late youare, Harry!” he murmured.“I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr.
Gray,” answered a shrill voice.He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet. “I
beg your pardon. Ithought—”“You thought it was my husband. It is only his wife.
You must let meintroduce myself. I know you quite well by your photographs. I
think myhusband has got seventeen of them.”“Not seventeen, Lady Henry?”“Well,
eighteen, then. And I saw you with him the other night at theopera.” She laughed
nervously as she spoke, and watched him with hervague forget-me-not eyes. She
was a curious woman, whose dresses alwayslooked as if they had been designed in
a rage and put on in a tempest.She was usually in love with somebody, and, as
her passion was neverreturned, she had kept all her illusions. She tried to
lookpicturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy. Her name was Victoria,and
she had a perfect mania for going to church.“That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry,
I think?”“Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin. I like Wagner’s music better
thananybody’s. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without
otherpeople hearing what one says. That is a great advantage, don’t youthink so,
Mr. Gray?”The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and
herfingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.Dorian smiled
and shook his head: “I am afraid I don’t think so, LadyHenry. I never talk
during music—at least, during good music. If onehears bad music, it is one’s
duty to drown it in conversation.”“Ah! that is one of Harry’s views, isn’t it,
Mr. Gray? I always hearHarry’s views from his friends. It is the only way I get
to know ofthem. But you must not think I don’t like good music. I adore it, but
Iam afraid of it. It makes me too romantic. I have simply worshippedpianists—two
at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me. I don’t know what itis about them. Perhaps
it is that they are foreigners. They all are,ain’t they? Even those that are
born in England become foreigners aftera time, don’t they? It is so clever of
them, and such a compliment toart. Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn’t it? You
have never been toany of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray? You must come. I can’t
affordorchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners. They make one’s roomslook
so picturesque. But here is Harry! Harry, I came in to look foryou, to ask you
something—I forget what it was—and I found Mr. Grayhere. We have had such a
pleasant chat about music. We have quite thesame ideas. No; I think our ideas
are quite different. But he has beenmost pleasant. I am so glad I’ve seen
him.”“I am charmed, my love, quite charmed,” said Lord Henry, elevating hisdark,
crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amusedsmile. “So sorry
I am late, Dorian. I went to look after a piece of oldbrocade in Wardour Street
and had to bargain for hours for it. Nowadayspeople know the price of everything
and the value of nothing.”“I am afraid I must be going,” exclaimed Lady Henry,
breaking anawkward silence with her silly sudden laugh. “I have promised to
drivewith the duchess. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Good-bye, Harry. You are diningout, I
suppose? So am I. Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury’s.”“I dare say, my
dear,” said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind heras, looking like a bird of
paradise that had been out all night in therain, she flitted out of the room,
leaving a faint odour offrangipanni. Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself
down on thesofa.“Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian,” he said
after afew puffs.“Why, Harry?”“Because they are so sentimental.”“But I like
sentimental people.”“Never marry at all, Dorian. Men marry because they are
tired; women,because they are curious: both are disappointed.”“I don’t think I
am likely to marry, Harry. I am too much in love. Thatis one of your aphorisms.
I am putting it into practice, as I doeverything that you say.”“Who are you in
love with?” asked Lord Henry after a pause.“With an actress,” said Dorian Gray,
blushing.Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “That is a rather
commonplace_début_.”“You would not say so if you saw her, Harry.”“Who is
she?”“Her name is Sibyl Vane.”“Never heard of her.”“No one has. People will some
day, however. She is a genius.”“My dear boy, no woman is a genius. Women are a
decorative sex. Theynever have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.
Women representthe triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the
triumph ofmind over morals.”“Harry, how can you?”“My dear Dorian, it is quite
true. I am analysing women at present, soI ought to know. The subject is not so
abstruse as I thought it was. Ifind that, ultimately, there are only two kinds
of women, the plain andthe coloured. The plain women are very useful. If you
want to gain areputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down
tosupper. The other women are very charming. They commit one mistake,however.
They paint in order to try and look young. Our grandmotherspainted in order to
try and talk brilliantly. _Rouge_ and _esprit_ usedto go together. That is all
over now. As long as a woman can look tenyears younger than her own daughter,
she is perfectly satisfied. As forconversation, there are only five women in
London worth talking to, andtwo of these can’t be admitted into decent society.
However, tell meabout your genius. How long have you known her?”“Ah! Harry, your
views terrify me.”“Never mind that. How long have you known her?”“About three
weeks.”“And where did you come across her?”“I will tell you, Harry, but you
mustn’t be unsympathetic about it.After all, it never would have happened if I
had not met you. Youfilled me with a wild desire to know everything about life.
For daysafter I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins. As I lounged
inthe park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one whopassed
me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives theyled. Some of them
fascinated me. Others filled me with terror. Therewas an exquisite poison in the
air. I had a passion for sensations....Well, one evening about seven o’clock, I
determined to go out in searchof some adventure. I felt that this grey monstrous
London of ours, withits myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid
sins, asyou once phrased it, must have something in store for me. I fancied
athousand things. The mere danger gave me a sense of delight. Iremembered what
you had said to me on that wonderful evening when wefirst dined together, about
the search for beauty being the real secretof life. I don’t know what I
expected, but I went out and wanderedeastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth
of grimy streets and blackgrassless squares. About half-past eight I passed by
an absurd littletheatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills. A
hideousJew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, wasstanding
at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar. He had greasy ringlets,and an enormous
diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt. ‘Have abox, my Lord?’ he said,
when he saw me, and he took off his hat with anair of gorgeous servility. There
was something about him, Harry, thatamused me. He was such a monster. You will
laugh at me, I know, but Ireally went in and paid a whole guinea for the
stage-box. To thepresent day I can’t make out why I did so; and yet if I
hadn’t—my dearHarry, if I hadn’t—I should have missed the greatest romance of
mylife. I see you are laughing. It is horrid of you!”“I am not laughing, Dorian;
at least I am not laughing at you. But youshould not say the greatest romance of
your life. You should say thefirst romance of your life. You will always be
loved, and you willalways be in love with love. A _grande passion_ is the
privilege ofpeople who have nothing to do. That is the one use of the idle
classesof a country. Don’t be afraid. There are exquisite things in store
foryou. This is merely the beginning.”“Do you think my nature so shallow?” cried
Dorian Gray angrily.“No; I think your nature so deep.”“How do you mean?”“My dear
boy, the people who love only once in their lives are reallythe shallow people.
What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, Icall either the lethargy of
custom or their lack of imagination.Faithfulness is to the emotional life what
consistency is to the lifeof the intellect—simply a confession of failure.
Faithfulness! I mustanalyse it some day. The passion for property is in it.
There are manythings that we would throw away if we were not afraid that others
mightpick them up. But I don’t want to interrupt you. Go on with
yourstory.”“Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with
avulgar drop-scene staring me in the face. I looked out from behind thecurtain
and surveyed the house. It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids andcornucopias, like
a third-rate wedding-cake. The gallery and pit werefairly full, but the two rows
of dingy stalls were quite empty, andthere was hardly a person in what I suppose
they called thedress-circle. Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and
therewas a terrible consumption of nuts going on.”“It must have been just like
the palmy days of the British drama.”“Just like, I should fancy, and very
depressing. I began to wonder whaton earth I should do when I caught sight of
the play-bill. What do youthink the play was, Harry?”“I should think ‘The Idiot
Boy’, or ‘Dumb but Innocent’. Our fathersused to like that sort of piece, I
believe. The longer I live, Dorian,the more keenly I feel that whatever was good
enough for our fathers isnot good enough for us. In art, as in politics, _les
grandpères onttoujours tort_.”“This play was good enough for us, Harry. It was
Romeo and Juliet. Imust admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing
Shakespearedone in such a wretched hole of a place. Still, I felt interested, in
asort of way. At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act. Therewas a
dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat at acracked piano,
that nearly drove me away, but at last the drop-scenewas drawn up and the play
began. Romeo was a stout elderly gentleman,with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy
voice, and a figure like abeer-barrel. Mercutio was almost as bad. He was played
by thelow-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on mostfriendly
terms with the pit. They were both as grotesque as thescenery, and that looked
as if it had come out of a country-booth. ButJuliet! Harry, imagine a girl,
hardly seventeen years of age, with alittle, flowerlike face, a small Greek head
with plaited coils ofdark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion,
lips that werelike the petals of a rose. She was the loveliest thing I had ever
seenin my life. You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but
thatbeauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears. I tell you,Harry, I
could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that cameacross me. And her
voice—I never heard such a voice. It was very low atfirst, with deep mellow
notes that seemed to fall singly upon one’sear. Then it became a little louder,
and sounded like a flute or adistant hautboy. In the garden-scene it had all the
tremulous ecstasythat one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing.
Therewere moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins. Youknow
how a voice can stir one. Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vaneare two things
that I shall never forget. When I close my eyes, I hearthem, and each of them
says something different. I don’t know which tofollow. Why should I not love
her? Harry, I do love her. She iseverything to me in life. Night after night I
go to see her play. Oneevening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is
Imogen. I haveseen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison
fromher lover’s lips. I have watched her wandering through the forest ofArden,
disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap.She has been mad,
and has come into the presence of a guilty king, andgiven him rue to wear and
bitter herbs to taste of. She has beeninnocent, and the black hands of jealousy
have crushed her reedlikethroat. I have seen her in every age and in every
costume. Ordinarywomen never appeal to one’s imagination. They are limited to
theircentury. No glamour ever transfigures them. One knows their minds aseasily
as one knows their bonnets. One can always find them. There isno mystery in any
of them. They ride in the park in the morning andchatter at tea-parties in the
afternoon. They have their stereotypedsmile and their fashionable manner. They
are quite obvious. But anactress! How different an actress is! Harry! why didn’t
you tell methat the only thing worth loving is an actress?”“Because I have loved
so many of them, Dorian.”“Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted
faces.”“Don’t run down dyed hair and painted faces. There is an
extraordinarycharm in them, sometimes,” said Lord Henry.“I wish now I had not
told you about Sibyl Vane.”“You could not have helped telling me, Dorian. All
through your lifeyou will tell me everything you do.”“Yes, Harry, I believe that
is true. I cannot help telling you things.You have a curious influence over me.
If I ever did a crime, I wouldcome and confess it to you. You would understand
me.”“People like you—the wilful sunbeams of life—don’t commit crimes,Dorian. But
I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same. And nowtell me—reach me the
matches, like a good boy—thanks—what are youractual relations with Sibyl
Vane?”Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning
eyes.“Harry! Sibyl Vane is sacred!”“It is only the sacred things that are worth
touching, Dorian,” saidLord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.
“But whyshould you be annoyed? I suppose she will belong to you some day.
Whenone is in love, one always begins by deceiving one’s self, and onealways
ends by deceiving others. That is what the world calls aromance. You know her,
at any rate, I suppose?”“Of course I know her. On the first night I was at the
theatre, thehorrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over
andoffered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her. I wasfurious
with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundredsof years and that
her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona. Ithink, from his blank look of
amazement, that he was under theimpression that I had taken too much champagne,
or something.”“I am not surprised.”“Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the
newspapers. I told him Inever even read them. He seemed terribly disappointed at
that, andconfided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a
conspiracyagainst him, and that they were every one of them to be bought.”“I
should not wonder if he was quite right there. But, on the otherhand, judging
from their appearance, most of them cannot be at allexpensive.”“Well, he seemed
to think they were beyond his means,” laughed Dorian.“By this time, however, the
lights were being put out in the theatre,and I had to go. He wanted me to try
some cigars that he stronglyrecommended. I declined. The next night, of course,
I arrived at theplace again. When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me
that Iwas a munificent patron of art. He was a most offensive brute, thoughhe
had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare. He told me once, withan air of
pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to ‘TheBard,’ as he insisted
on calling him. He seemed to think it adistinction.”“It was a distinction, my
dear Dorian—a great distinction. Most peoplebecome bankrupt through having
invested too heavily in the prose oflife. To have ruined one’s self over poetry
is an honour. But when didyou first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?”“The third night.
She had been playing Rosalind. I could not help goinground. I had thrown her
some flowers, and she had looked at me—at leastI fancied that she had. The old
Jew was persistent. He seemeddetermined to take me behind, so I consented. It
was curious my notwanting to know her, wasn’t it?”“No; I don’t think so.”“My
dear Harry, why?”“I will tell you some other time. Now I want to know about the
girl.”“Sibyl? Oh, she was so shy and so gentle. There is something of a
childabout her. Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told herwhat I
thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious ofher power. I
think we were both rather nervous. The old Jew stoodgrinning at the doorway of
the dusty greenroom, making elaboratespeeches about us both, while we stood
looking at each other likechildren. He would insist on calling me ‘My Lord,’ so
I had to assureSibyl that I was not anything of the kind. She said quite simply
to me,‘You look more like a prince. I must call you Prince Charming.’”“Upon my
word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments.”“You don’t understand
her, Harry. She regarded me merely as a person ina play. She knows nothing of
life. She lives with her mother, a fadedtired woman who played Lady Capulet in a
sort of magentadressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had
seenbetter days.”“I know that look. It depresses me,” murmured Lord Henry,
examining hisrings.“The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not
interestme.”“You were quite right. There is always something infinitely mean
aboutother people’s tragedies.”“Sibyl is the only thing I care about. What is it
to me where she camefrom? From her little head to her little feet, she is
absolutely andentirely divine. Every night of my life I go to see her act, and
everynight she is more marvellous.”“That is the reason, I suppose, that you
never dine with me now. Ithought you must have some curious romance on hand. You
have; but it isnot quite what I expected.”“My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup
together every day, and I havebeen to the opera with you several times,” said
Dorian, opening hisblue eyes in wonder.“You always come dreadfully late.”“Well,
I can’t help going to see Sibyl play,” he cried, “even if it isonly for a single
act. I get hungry for her presence; and when I thinkof the wonderful soul that
is hidden away in that little ivory body, Iam filled with awe.”“You can dine
with me to-night, Dorian, can’t you?”He shook his head. “To-night she is
Imogen,” he answered, “andto-morrow night she will be Juliet.”“When is she Sibyl
Vane?”“Never.”“I congratulate you.”“How horrid you are! She is all the great
heroines of the world in one.She is more than an individual. You laugh, but I
tell you she hasgenius. I love her, and I must make her love me. You, who know
all thesecrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me! I want
tomake Romeo jealous. I want the dead lovers of the world to hear ourlaughter
and grow sad. I want a breath of our passion to stir theirdust into
consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain. My God, Harry,how I worship her!”
He was walking up and down the room as he spoke.Hectic spots of red burned on
his cheeks. He was terribly excited.Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense
of pleasure. How differenthe was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in
Basil Hallward’sstudio! His nature had developed like a flower, had borne
blossoms ofscarlet flame. Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul,
anddesire had come to meet it on the way.“And what do you propose to do?” said
Lord Henry at last.“I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her
act. Ihave not the slightest fear of the result. You are certain toacknowledge
her genius. Then we must get her out of the Jew’s hands.She is bound to him for
three years—at least for two years and eightmonths—from the present time. I
shall have to pay him something, ofcourse. When all that is settled, I shall
take a West End theatre andbring her out properly. She will make the world as
mad as she has mademe.”“That would be impossible, my dear boy.”“Yes, she will.
She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, inher, but she has personality
also; and you have often told me that itis personalities, not principles, that
move the age.”“Well, what night shall we go?”“Let me see. To-day is Tuesday. Let
us fix to-morrow. She plays Julietto-morrow.”“All right. The Bristol at eight
o’clock; and I will get Basil.”“Not eight, Harry, please. Half-past six. We must
be there before thecurtain rises. You must see her in the first act, where she
meetsRomeo.”“Half-past six! What an hour! It will be like having a meat-tea,
orreading an English novel. It must be seven. No gentleman dines beforeseven.
Shall you see Basil between this and then? Or shall I write tohim?”“Dear Basil!
I have not laid eyes on him for a week. It is ratherhorrid of me, as he has sent
me my portrait in the most wonderfulframe, specially designed by himself, and,
though I am a little jealousof the picture for being a whole month younger than
I am, I must admitthat I delight in it. Perhaps you had better write to him. I
don’t wantto see him alone. He says things that annoy me. He gives me
goodadvice.”Lord Henry smiled. “People are very fond of giving away what they
needmost themselves. It is what I call the depth of generosity.”“Oh, Basil is
the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bitof a Philistine. Since I
have known you, Harry, I have discoveredthat.”“Basil, my dear boy, puts
everything that is charming in him into hiswork. The consequence is that he has
nothing left for life but hisprejudices, his principles, and his common sense.
The only artists Ihave ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.
Goodartists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are
perfectlyuninteresting in what they are. A great poet, a really great poet,
isthe most unpoetical of all creatures. But inferior poets are
absolutelyfascinating. The worse their rhymes are, the more picturesque
theylook. The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnetsmakes a
man quite irresistible. He lives the poetry that he cannotwrite. The others
write the poetry that they dare not realize.”“I wonder is that really so,
Harry?” said Dorian Gray, putting someperfume on his handkerchief out of a
large, gold-topped bottle thatstood on the table. “It must be, if you say it.
And now I am off.Imogen is waiting for me. Don’t forget about to-morrow.
Good-bye.”As he left the room, Lord Henry’s heavy eyelids drooped, and he
beganto think. Certainly few people had ever interested him so much asDorian
Gray, and yet the lad’s mad adoration of some one else causedhim not the
slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy. He was pleased byit. It made him a more
interesting study. He had been always enthralledby the methods of natural
science, but the ordinary subject-matter ofthat science had seemed to him
trivial and of no import. And so he hadbegun by vivisecting himself, as he had
ended by vivisecting others.Human life—that appeared to him the one thing worth
investigating.Compared to it there was nothing else of any value. It was true
that asone watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, onecould
not wear over one’s face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurousfumes from
troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid withmonstrous fancies and
misshapen dreams. There were poisons so subtlethat to know their properties one
had to sicken of them. There weremaladies so strange that one had to pass
through them if one sought tounderstand their nature. And, yet, what a great
reward one received!How wonderful the whole world became to one! To note the
curious hardlogic of passion, and the emotional coloured life of the
intellect—toobserve where they met, and where they separated, at what point
theywere in unison, and at what point they were at discord—there was adelight in
that! What matter what the cost was? One could never pay toohigh a price for any
sensation.He was conscious—and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into
hisbrown agate eyes—that it was through certain words of his, musicalwords said
with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray’s soul had turnedto this white girl and
bowed in worship before her. To a large extentthe lad was his own creation. He
had made him premature. That wassomething. Ordinary people waited till life
disclosed to them itssecrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of
life wererevealed before the veil was drawn away. Sometimes this was the
effectof art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediatelywith
the passions and the intellect. But now and then a complexpersonality took the
place and assumed the office of art, was indeed,in its way, a real work of art,
life having its elaborate masterpieces,just as poetry has, or sculpture, or
painting.Yes, the lad was premature. He was gathering his harvest while it
wasyet spring. The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he wasbecoming
self-conscious. It was delightful to watch him. With hisbeautiful face, and his
beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at. Itwas no matter how it all ended,
or was destined to end. He was like oneof those gracious figures in a pageant or
a play, whose joys seem to beremote from one, but whose sorrows stir one’s sense
of beauty, andwhose wounds are like red roses.Soul and body, body and soul—how
mysterious they were! There wasanimalism in the soul, and the body had its
moments of spirituality.The senses could refine, and the intellect could
degrade. Who could saywhere the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse
began? Howshallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists!
Andyet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools!Was the
soul a shadow seated in the house of sin? Or was the bodyreally in the soul, as
Giordano Bruno thought? The separation of spiritfrom matter was a mystery, and
the union of spirit with matter was amystery also.He began to wonder whether we
could ever make psychology so absolute ascience that each little spring of life
would be revealed to us. As itwas, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely
understood others.Experience was of no ethical value. It was merely the name men
gave totheir mistakes. Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode
ofwarning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formationof
character, had praised it as something that taught us what to followand showed
us what to avoid. But there was no motive power inexperience. It was as little
of an active cause as conscience itself.All that it really demonstrated was that
our future would be the sameas our past, and that the sin we had done once, and
with loathing, wewould do many times, and with joy.It was clear to him that the
experimental method was the only method bywhich one could arrive at any
scientific analysis of the passions; andcertainly Dorian Gray was a subject made
to his hand, and seemed topromise rich and fruitful results. His sudden mad love
for Sibyl Vanewas a psychological phenomenon of no small interest. There was no
doubtthat curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for
newexperiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complexpassion. What
there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct ofboyhood had been transformed
by the workings of the imagination,changed into something that seemed to the lad
himself to be remote fromsense, and was for that very reason all the more
dangerous. It was thepassions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that
tyrannized moststrongly over us. Our weakest motives were those of whose nature
wewere conscious. It often happened that when we thought we wereexperimenting on
others we were really experimenting on ourselves.While Lord Henry sat dreaming
on these things, a knock came to thedoor, and his valet entered and reminded him
it was time to dress fordinner. He got up and looked out into the street. The
sunset hadsmitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite.
Thepanes glowed like plates of heated metal. The sky above was like afaded rose.
He thought of his friend’s young fiery-coloured life andwondered how it was all
going to end.When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o’clock, he saw a
telegramlying on the hall table. He opened it and found it was from DorianGray.
It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to SibylVane.CHAPTER
V.“Mother, Mother, I am so happy!” whispered the girl, burying her facein the
lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned tothe shrill
intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that theirdingy sitting-room
contained. “I am so happy!” she repeated, “and youmust be happy, too!”Mrs. Vane
winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on herdaughter’s head. “Happy!”
she echoed, “I am only happy, Sibyl, when Isee you act. You must not think of
anything but your acting. Mr. Isaacshas been very good to us, and we owe him
money.”The girl looked up and pouted. “Money, Mother?” she cried, “what
doesmoney matter? Love is more than money.”“Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty
pounds to pay off our debts and toget a proper outfit for James. You must not
forget that, Sibyl. Fiftypounds is a very large sum. Mr. Isaacs has been most
considerate.”“He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to
me,”said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.“I don’t know
how we could manage without him,” answered the elderwoman querulously.Sibyl Vane
tossed her head and laughed. “We don’t want him any more,Mother. Prince Charming
rules life for us now.” Then she paused. A roseshook in her blood and shadowed
her cheeks. Quick breath parted thepetals of her lips. They trembled. Some
southern wind of passion sweptover her and stirred the dainty folds of her
dress. “I love him,” shesaid simply.“Foolish child! foolish child!” was the
parrot-phrase flung in answer.The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave
grotesqueness to thewords.The girl laughed again. The joy of a caged bird was in
her voice. Hereyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for
amoment, as though to hide their secret. When they opened, the mist of adream
had passed across them.Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair,
hinted atprudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the
nameof common sense. She did not listen. She was free in her prison ofpassion.
Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her. She had called onmemory to remake
him. She had sent her soul to search for him, and ithad brought him back. His
kiss burned again upon her mouth. Her eyelidswere warm with his breath.Then
wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery. Thisyoung man might
be rich. If so, marriage should be thought of. Againstthe shell of her ear broke
the waves of worldly cunning. The arrows ofcraft shot by her. She saw the thin
lips moving, and smiled.Suddenly she felt the need to speak. The wordy silence
troubled her.“Mother, Mother,” she cried, “why does he love me so much? I know
why Ilove him. I love him because he is like what love himself should be.But
what does he see in me? I am not worthy of him. And yet—why, Icannot tell—though
I feel so much beneath him, I don’t feel humble. Ifeel proud, terribly proud.
Mother, did you love my father as I lovePrince Charming?”The elder woman grew
pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed hercheeks, and her dry lips twitched
with a spasm of pain. Sybil rushed toher, flung her arms round her neck, and
kissed her. “Forgive me,Mother. I know it pains you to talk about our father.
But it only painsyou because you loved him so much. Don’t look so sad. I am as
happyto-day as you were twenty years ago. Ah! let me be happy for ever!”“My
child, you are far too young to think of falling in love. Besides,what do you
know of this young man? You don’t even know his name. Thewhole thing is most
inconvenient, and really, when James is going awayto Australia, and I have so
much to think of, I must say that youshould have shown more consideration.
However, as I said before, if heis rich ...”“Ah! Mother, Mother, let me be
happy!”Mrs. Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatricalgestures
that so often become a mode of second nature to astage-player, clasped her in
her arms. At this moment, the door openedand a young lad with rough brown hair
came into the room. He wasthick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large
and somewhatclumsy in movement. He was not so finely bred as his sister. One
wouldhardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between them.Mrs.
Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile. She mentallyelevated her
son to the dignity of an audience. She felt sure that the_tableau_ was
interesting.“You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think,” said
thelad with a good-natured grumble.“Ah! but you don’t like being kissed, Jim,”
she cried. “You are adreadful old bear.” And she ran across the room and hugged
him.James Vane looked into his sister’s face with tenderness. “I want youto come
out with me for a walk, Sibyl. I don’t suppose I shall ever seethis horrid
London again. I am sure I don’t want to.”“My son, don’t say such dreadful
things,” murmured Mrs. Vane, taking upa tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh,
and beginning to patch it. Shefelt a little disappointed that he had not joined
the group. It wouldhave increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the
situation.“Why not, Mother? I mean it.”“You pain me, my son. I trust you will
return from Australia in aposition of affluence. I believe there is no society
of any kind in theColonies—nothing that I would call society—so when you have
made yourfortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London.”“Society!”
muttered the lad. “I don’t want to know anything about that.I should like to
make some money to take you and Sibyl off the stage. Ihate it.”“Oh, Jim!” said
Sibyl, laughing, “how unkind of you! But are you reallygoing for a walk with me?
That will be nice! I was afraid you weregoing to say good-bye to some of your
friends—to Tom Hardy, who gaveyou that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes
fun of you for smokingit. It is very sweet of you to let me have your last
afternoon. Whereshall we go? Let us go to the park.”“I am too shabby,” he
answered, frowning. “Only swell people go to thepark.”“Nonsense, Jim,” she
whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.He hesitated for a moment. “Very
well,” he said at last, “but don’t betoo long dressing.” She danced out of the
door. One could hear hersinging as she ran upstairs. Her little feet pattered
overhead.He walked up and down the room two or three times. Then he turned tothe
still figure in the chair. “Mother, are my things ready?” he asked.“Quite ready,
James,” she answered, keeping her eyes on her work. Forsome months past she had
felt ill at ease when she was alone with thisrough stern son of hers. Her
shallow secret nature was troubled whentheir eyes met. She used to wonder if he
suspected anything. Thesilence, for he made no other observation, became
intolerable to her.She began to complain. Women defend themselves by attacking,
just asthey attack by sudden and strange surrenders. “I hope you will
becontented, James, with your sea-faring life,” she said. “You mustremember that
it is your own choice. You might have entered asolicitor’s office. Solicitors
are a very respectable class, and in thecountry often dine with the best
families.”“I hate offices, and I hate clerks,” he replied. “But you are
quiteright. I have chosen my own life. All I say is, watch over Sibyl. Don’tlet
her come to any harm. Mother, you must watch over her.”“James, you really talk
very strangely. Of course I watch over Sibyl.”“I hear a gentleman comes every
night to the theatre and goes behind totalk to her. Is that right? What about
that?”“You are speaking about things you don’t understand, James. In
theprofession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most
gratifyingattention. I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time. That
waswhen acting was really understood. As for Sibyl, I do not know atpresent
whether her attachment is serious or not. But there is no doubtthat the young
man in question is a perfect gentleman. He is alwaysmost polite to me. Besides,
he has the appearance of being rich, andthe flowers he sends are lovely.”“You
don’t know his name, though,” said the lad harshly.“No,” answered his mother
with a placid expression in her face. “He hasnot yet revealed his real name. I
think it is quite romantic of him. Heis probably a member of the
aristocracy.”James Vane bit his lip. “Watch over Sibyl, Mother,” he cried,
“watchover her.”“My son, you distress me very much. Sibyl is always under my
specialcare. Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason whyshe
should not contract an alliance with him. I trust he is one of thearistocracy.
He has all the appearance of it, I must say. It might be amost brilliant
marriage for Sibyl. They would make a charming couple.His good looks are really
quite remarkable; everybody notices them.”The lad muttered something to himself
and drummed on the window-panewith his coarse fingers. He had just turned round
to say something whenthe door opened and Sibyl ran in.“How serious you both
are!” she cried. “What is the matter?”“Nothing,” he answered. “I suppose one
must be serious sometimes.Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five
o’clock. Everything ispacked, except my shirts, so you need not
trouble.”“Good-bye, my son,” she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.She
was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, andthere was
something in his look that had made her feel afraid.“Kiss me, Mother,” said the
girl. Her flowerlike lips touched thewithered cheek and warmed its frost.“My
child! my child!” cried Mrs. Vane, looking up to the ceiling insearch of an
imaginary gallery.“Come, Sibyl,” said her brother impatiently. He hated his
mother’saffectations.They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and
strolleddown the dreary Euston Road. The passersby glanced in wonder at
thesullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in thecompany of
such a graceful, refined-looking girl. He was like a commongardener walking with
a rose.Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance
ofsome stranger. He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes ongeniuses
late in life and never leaves the commonplace. Sibyl, however,was quite
unconscious of the effect she was producing. Her love wastrembling in laughter
on her lips. She was thinking of Prince Charming,and, that she might think of
him all the more, she did not talk of him,but prattled on about the ship in
which Jim was going to sail, aboutthe gold he was certain to find, about the
wonderful heiress whose lifehe was to save from the wicked, red-shirted
bushrangers. For he was notto remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or whatever he
was going to be.Oh, no! A sailor’s existence was dreadful. Fancy being cooped up
in ahorrid ship, with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and ablack
wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into longscreaming ribands! He
was to leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid apolite good-bye to the captain, and
go off at once to the gold-fields.Before a week was over he was to come across a
large nugget of puregold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and
bring itdown to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen.
Thebushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated withimmense
slaughter. Or, no. He was not to go to the gold-fields at all.They were horrid
places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each otherin bar-rooms, and used bad
language. He was to be a nice sheep-farmer,and one evening, as he was riding
home, he was to see the beautifulheiress being carried off by a robber on a
black horse, and give chase,and rescue her. Of course, she would fall in love
with him, and he withher, and they would get married, and come home, and live in
an immensehouse in London. Yes, there were delightful things in store for
him.But he must be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his
moneyfoolishly. She was only a year older than he was, but she knew so muchmore
of life. He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, andto say his
prayers each night before he went to sleep. God was verygood, and would watch
over him. She would pray for him, too, and in afew years he would come back
quite rich and happy.The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer. He was
heart-sickat leaving home.Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and
morose.Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the dangerof
Sibyl’s position. This young dandy who was making love to her couldmean her no
good. He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hatedhim through some
curious race-instinct for which he could not account,and which for that reason
was all the more dominant within him. He wasconscious also of the shallowness
and vanity of his mother’s nature,and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and
Sibyl’s happiness.Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older
they judgethem; sometimes they forgive them.His mother! He had something on his
mind to ask of her, something thathe had brooded on for many months of silence.
A chance phrase that hehad heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had
reached his earsone night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train
ofhorrible thoughts. He remembered it as if it had been the lash of
ahunting-crop across his face. His brows knit together into a wedge-likefurrow,
and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.“You are not listening to a word I
am saying, Jim,” cried Sibyl, “and Iam making the most delightful plans for your
future. Do say something.”“What do you want me to say?”“Oh! that you will be a
good boy and not forget us,” she answered,smiling at him.He shrugged his
shoulders. “You are more likely to forget me than I amto forget you, Sibyl.”She
flushed. “What do you mean, Jim?” she asked.“You have a new friend, I hear. Who
is he? Why have you not told meabout him? He means you no good.”“Stop, Jim!” she
exclaimed. “You must not say anything against him. Ilove him.”“Why, you don’t
even know his name,” answered the lad. “Who is he? Ihave a right to know.”“He is
called Prince Charming. Don’t you like the name. Oh! you sillyboy! you should
never forget it. If you only saw him, you would thinkhim the most wonderful
person in the world. Some day you will meethim—when you come back from
Australia. You will like him so much.Everybody likes him, and I ... love him. I
wish you could come to thetheatre to-night. He is going to be there, and I am to
play Juliet. Oh!how I shall play it! Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet!
To havehim sitting there! To play for his delight! I am afraid I may frightenthe
company, frighten or enthrall them. To be in love is to surpassone’s self. Poor
dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting ‘genius’ to hisloafers at the bar. He has
preached me as a dogma; to-night he willannounce me as a revelation. I feel it.
And it is all his, his only,Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of
graces. But I am poorbeside him. Poor? What does that matter? When poverty
creeps in at thedoor, love flies in through the window. Our proverbs want
rewriting.They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time for me,
Ithink, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies.”“He is a gentleman,” said the
lad sullenly.“A prince!” she cried musically. “What more do you want?”“He wants
to enslave you.”“I shudder at the thought of being free.”“I want you to beware
of him.”“To see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him.”“Sibyl, you
are mad about him.”She laughed and took his arm. “You dear old Jim, you talk as
if youwere a hundred. Some day you will be in love yourself. Then you willknow
what it is. Don’t look so sulky. Surely you should be glad tothink that, though
you are going away, you leave me happier than I haveever been before. Life has
been hard for us both, terribly hard anddifficult. But it will be different now.
You are going to a new world,and I have found one. Here are two chairs; let us
sit down and see thesmart people go by.”They took their seats amidst a crowd of
watchers. The tulip-beds acrossthe road flamed like throbbing rings of fire. A
white dust—tremulouscloud of orris-root it seemed—hung in the panting air. The
brightlycoloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous butterflies.She made
her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects. Hespoke slowly and with
effort. They passed words to each other asplayers at a game pass counters. Sibyl
felt oppressed. She could notcommunicate her joy. A faint smile curving that
sullen mouth was allthe echo she could win. After some time she became silent.
Suddenly shecaught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an
opencarriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.She started to her feet.
“There he is!” she cried.“Who?” said Jim Vane.“Prince Charming,” she answered,
looking after the victoria.He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm. “Show
him to me. Whichis he? Point him out. I must see him!” he exclaimed; but at that
momentthe Duke of Berwick’s four-in-hand came between, and when it had leftthe
space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.“He is gone,” murmured Sibyl
sadly. “I wish you had seen him.”“I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in
heaven, if he ever doesyou any wrong, I shall kill him.”She looked at him in
horror. He repeated his words. They cut the airlike a dagger. The people round
began to gape. A lady standing close toher tittered.“Come away, Jim; come away,”
she whispered. He followed her doggedly asshe passed through the crowd. He felt
glad at what he had said.When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned
round. There was pityin her eyes that became laughter on her lips. She shook her
head athim. “You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy, thatis
all. How can you say such horrible things? You don’t know what youare talking
about. You are simply jealous and unkind. Ah! I wish youwould fall in love. Love
makes people good, and what you said waswicked.”“I am sixteen,” he answered,
“and I know what I am about. Mother is nohelp to you. She doesn’t understand how
to look after you. I wish nowthat I was not going to Australia at all. I have a
great mind to chuckthe whole thing up. I would, if my articles hadn’t been
signed.”“Oh, don’t be so serious, Jim. You are like one of the heroes of
thosesilly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in. I am not goingto
quarrel with you. I have seen him, and oh! to see him is perfecthappiness. We
won’t quarrel. I know you would never harm any one Ilove, would you?”“Not as
long as you love him, I suppose,” was the sullen answer.“I shall love him for
ever!” she cried.“And he?”“For ever, too!”“He had better.”She shrank from him.
Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm. Hewas merely a boy.At the Marble
Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close totheir shabby home in the
Euston Road. It was after five o’clock, andSibyl had to lie down for a couple of
hours before acting. Jim insistedthat she should do so. He said that he would
sooner part with her whentheir mother was not present. She would be sure to make
a scene, and hedetested scenes of every kind.In Sybil’s own room they parted.
There was jealousy in the lad’s heart,and a fierce murderous hatred of the
stranger who, as it seemed to him,had come between them. Yet, when her arms were
flung round his neck,and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and
kissed herwith real affection. There were tears in his eyes as he
wentdownstairs.His mother was waiting for him below. She grumbled at
hisunpunctuality, as he entered. He made no answer, but sat down to hismeagre
meal. The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over thestained cloth.
Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter ofstreet-cabs, he could hear
the droning voice devouring each minute thatwas left to him.After some time, he
thrust away his plate and put his head in hishands. He felt that he had a right
to know. It should have been told tohim before, if it was as he suspected.
Leaden with fear, his motherwatched him. Words dropped mechanically from her
lips. A tattered lacehandkerchief twitched in her fingers. When the clock struck
six, he gotup and went to the door. Then he turned back and looked at her.
Theireyes met. In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy. It enraged him.“Mother, I
have something to ask you,” he said. Her eyes wanderedvaguely about the room.
She made no answer. “Tell me the truth. I havea right to know. Were you married
to my father?”She heaved a deep sigh. It was a sigh of relief. The terrible
moment,the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded,had
come at last, and yet she felt no terror. Indeed, in some measureit was a
disappointment to her. The vulgar directness of the questioncalled for a direct
answer. The situation had not been gradually led upto. It was crude. It reminded
her of a bad rehearsal.“No,” she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of
life.“My father was a scoundrel then!” cried the lad, clenching his fists.She
shook her head. “I knew he was not free. We loved each other verymuch. If he had
lived, he would have made provision for us. Don’t speakagainst him, my son. He
was your father, and a gentleman. Indeed, hewas highly connected.”An oath broke
from his lips. “I don’t care for myself,” he exclaimed,“but don’t let Sibyl....
It is a gentleman, isn’t it, who is in lovewith her, or says he is? Highly
connected, too, I suppose.”For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over
the woman. Herhead drooped. She wiped her eyes with shaking hands. “Sibyl has
amother,” she murmured; “I had none.”The lad was touched. He went towards her,
and stooping down, he kissedher. “I am sorry if I have pained you by asking
about my father,” hesaid, “but I could not help it. I must go now. Good-bye.
Don’t forgetthat you will have only one child now to look after, and believe
methat if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track himdown,
and kill him like a dog. I swear it.”The exaggerated folly of the threat, the
passionate gesture thataccompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life
seem more vividto her. She was familiar with the atmosphere. She breathed more
freely,and for the first time for many months she really admired her son.
Shewould have liked to have continued the scene on the same emotionalscale, but
he cut her short. Trunks had to be carried down and mufflerslooked for. The
lodging-house drudge bustled in and out. There was thebargaining with the
cabman. The moment was lost in vulgar details. Itwas with a renewed feeling of
disappointment that she waved thetattered lace handkerchief from the window, as
her son drove away. Shewas conscious that a great opportunity had been wasted.
She consoledherself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt her life would be,
nowthat she had only one child to look after. She remembered the phrase.It had
pleased her. Of the threat she said nothing. It was vividly anddramatically
expressed. She felt that they would all laugh at it someday.CHAPTER VI.“I
suppose you have heard the news, Basil?” said Lord Henry thatevening as Hallward
was shown into a little private room at the Bristolwhere dinner had been laid
for three.“No, Harry,” answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the
bowingwaiter. “What is it? Nothing about politics, I hope! They don’tinterest
me. There is hardly a single person in the House of Commonsworth painting,
though many of them would be the better for a littlewhitewashing.”“Dorian Gray
is engaged to be married,” said Lord Henry, watching himas he spoke.Hallward
started and then frowned. “Dorian engaged to be married!” hecried.
“Impossible!”“It is perfectly true.”“To whom?”“To some little actress or
other.”“I can’t believe it. Dorian is far too sensible.”“Dorian is far too wise
not to do foolish things now and then, my dearBasil.”“Marriage is hardly a thing
that one can do now and then, Harry.”“Except in America,” rejoined Lord Henry
languidly. “But I didn’t sayhe was married. I said he was engaged to be married.
There is a greatdifference. I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but
I haveno recollection at all of being engaged. I am inclined to think that
Inever was engaged.”“But think of Dorian’s birth, and position, and wealth. It
would beabsurd for him to marry so much beneath him.”“If you want to make him
marry this girl, tell him that, Basil. He issure to do it, then. Whenever a man
does a thoroughly stupid thing, itis always from the noblest motives.”“I hope
the girl is good, Harry. I don’t want to see Dorian tied tosome vile creature,
who might degrade his nature and ruin hisintellect.”“Oh, she is better than
good—she is beautiful,” murmured Lord Henry,sipping a glass of vermouth and
orange-bitters. “Dorian says she isbeautiful, and he is not often wrong about
things of that kind. Yourportrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the
personalappearance of other people. It has had that excellent effect,
amongstothers. We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn’t forget
hisappointment.”“Are you serious?”“Quite serious, Basil. I should be miserable
if I thought I should everbe more serious than I am at the present moment.”“But
do you approve of it, Harry?” asked the painter, walking up anddown the room and
biting his lip. “You can’t approve of it, possibly.It is some silly
infatuation.”“I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now. It is an
absurdattitude to take towards life. We are not sent into the world to airour
moral prejudices. I never take any notice of what common peoplesay, and I never
interfere with what charming people do. If apersonality fascinates me, whatever
mode of expression that personalityselects is absolutely delightful to me.
Dorian Gray falls in love witha beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to
marry her. Why not?If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less
interesting. You knowI am not a champion of marriage. The real drawback to
marriage is thatit makes one unselfish. And unselfish people are colourless.
They lackindividuality. Still, there are certain temperaments that marriagemakes
more complex. They retain their egotism, and add to it many otheregos. They are
forced to have more than one life. They become morehighly organized, and to be
highly organized is, I should fancy, theobject of man’s existence. Besides,
every experience is of value, andwhatever one may say against marriage, it is
certainly an experience. Ihope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife,
passionately adoreher for six months, and then suddenly become fascinated by
some oneelse. He would be a wonderful study.”“You don’t mean a single word of
all that, Harry; you know you don’t.If Dorian Gray’s life were spoiled, no one
would be sorrier thanyourself. You are much better than you pretend to be.”Lord
Henry laughed. “The reason we all like to think so well of othersis that we are
all afraid for ourselves. The basis of optimism is sheerterror. We think that we
are generous because we credit our neighbourwith the possession of those virtues
that are likely to be a benefit tous. We praise the banker that we may overdraw
our account, and findgood qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may
spare ourpockets. I mean everything that I have said. I have the
greatestcontempt for optimism. As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled butone
whose growth is arrested. If you want to mar a nature, you havemerely to reform
it. As for marriage, of course that would be silly,but there are other and more
interesting bonds between men and women. Iwill certainly encourage them. They
have the charm of beingfashionable. But here is Dorian himself. He will tell you
more than Ican.”“My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!”
said thelad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings andshaking
each of his friends by the hand in turn. “I have never been sohappy. Of course,
it is sudden—all really delightful things are. Andyet it seems to me to be the
one thing I have been looking for all mylife.” He was flushed with excitement
and pleasure, and lookedextraordinarily handsome.“I hope you will always be very
happy, Dorian,” said Hallward, “but Idon’t quite forgive you for not having let
me know of your engagement.You let Harry know.”“And I don’t forgive you for
being late for dinner,” broke in LordHenry, putting his hand on the lad’s
shoulder and smiling as he spoke.“Come, let us sit down and try what the new
_chef_ here is like, andthen you will tell us how it all came about.”“There is
really not much to tell,” cried Dorian as they took theirseats at the small
round table. “What happened was simply this. After Ileft you yesterday evening,
Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at thatlittle Italian restaurant in Rupert
Street you introduced me to, andwent down at eight o’clock to the theatre. Sibyl
was playing Rosalind.Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd.
But Sibyl!You should have seen her! When she came on in her boy’s clothes,
shewas perfectly wonderful. She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin withcinnamon
sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty littlegreen cap with a
hawk’s feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloaklined with dull red. She had
never seemed to me more exquisite. She hadall the delicate grace of that Tanagra
figurine that you have in yourstudio, Basil. Her hair clustered round her face
like dark leaves rounda pale rose. As for her acting—well, you shall see her
to-night. She issimply a born artist. I sat in the dingy box absolutely
enthralled. Iforgot that I was in London and in the nineteenth century. I was
awaywith my love in a forest that no man had ever seen. After theperformance was
over, I went behind and spoke to her. As we weresitting together, suddenly there
came into her eyes a look that I hadnever seen there before. My lips moved
towards hers. We kissed eachother. I can’t describe to you what I felt at that
moment. It seemed tome that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect point
ofrose-coloured joy. She trembled all over and shook like a whitenarcissus. Then
she flung herself on her knees and kissed my hands. Ifeel that I should not tell
you all this, but I can’t help it. Ofcourse, our engagement is a dead secret.
She has not even told her ownmother. I don’t know what my guardians will say.
Lord Radley is sure tobe furious. I don’t care. I shall be of age in less than a
year, andthen I can do what I like. I have been right, Basil, haven’t I, to
takemy love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare’s plays? Lipsthat
Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their secret in my ear.I have had the
arms of Rosalind around me, and kissed Juliet on themouth.”“Yes, Dorian, I
suppose you were right,” said Hallward slowly.“Have you seen her to-day?” asked
Lord Henry.Dorian Gray shook his head. “I left her in the forest of Arden; I
shallfind her in an orchard in Verona.”Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a
meditative manner. “At whatparticular point did you mention the word marriage,
Dorian? And whatdid she say in answer? Perhaps you forgot all about it.”“My dear
Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I didnot make any
formal proposal. I told her that I loved her, and she saidshe was not worthy to
be my wife. Not worthy! Why, the whole world isnothing to me compared with
her.”“Women are wonderfully practical,” murmured Lord Henry, “much morepractical
than we are. In situations of that kind we often forget tosay anything about
marriage, and they always remind us.”Hallward laid his hand upon his arm.
“Don’t, Harry. You have annoyedDorian. He is not like other men. He would never
bring misery upon anyone. His nature is too fine for that.”Lord Henry looked
across the table. “Dorian is never annoyed with me,”he answered. “I asked the
question for the best reason possible, forthe only reason, indeed, that excuses
one for asking anyquestion—simple curiosity. I have a theory that it is always
the womenwho propose to us, and not we who propose to the women. Except,
ofcourse, in middle-class life. But then the middle classes are
notmodern.”Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head. “You are quite
incorrigible,Harry; but I don’t mind. It is impossible to be angry with you.
Whenyou see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong herwould be a
beast, a beast without a heart. I cannot understand how anyone can wish to shame
the thing he loves. I love Sibyl Vane. I want toplace her on a pedestal of gold
and to see the world worship the womanwho is mine. What is marriage? An
irrevocable vow. You mock at it forthat. Ah! don’t mock. It is an irrevocable
vow that I want to take. Hertrust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good.
When I am with her,I regret all that you have taught me. I become different from
what youhave known me to be. I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl
Vane’shand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating,
poisonous,delightful theories.”“And those are ...?” asked Lord Henry, helping
himself to some salad.“Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love,
your theoriesabout pleasure. All your theories, in fact, Harry.”“Pleasure is the
only thing worth having a theory about,” he answeredin his slow melodious voice.
“But I am afraid I cannot claim my theoryas my own. It belongs to Nature, not to
me. Pleasure is Nature’s test,her sign of approval. When we are happy, we are
always good, but whenwe are good, we are not always happy.”“Ah! but what do you
mean by good?” cried Basil Hallward.“Yes,” echoed Dorian, leaning back in his
chair and looking at LordHenry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises
that stood in thecentre of the table, “what do you mean by good, Harry?”“To be
good is to be in harmony with one’s self,” he replied, touchingthe thin stem of
his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.“Discord is to be forced to be in
harmony with others. One’s ownlife—that is the important thing. As for the lives
of one’s neighbours,if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt
one’s moralviews about them, but they are not one’s concern.
Besides,individualism has really the higher aim. Modern morality consists
inaccepting the standard of one’s age. I consider that for any man ofculture to
accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossestimmorality.”“But,
surely, if one lives merely for one’s self, Harry, one pays aterrible price for
doing so?” suggested the painter.“Yes, we are overcharged for everything
nowadays. I should fancy thatthe real tragedy of the poor is that they can
afford nothing butself-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the
privilegeof the rich.”“One has to pay in other ways but money.”“What sort of
ways, Basil?”“Oh! I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in
theconsciousness of degradation.”Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. “My dear
fellow, mediæval art ischarming, but mediæval emotions are out of date. One can
use them infiction, of course. But then the only things that one can use
infiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. Believe me,no
civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man everknows what a
pleasure is.”“I know what pleasure is,” cried Dorian Gray. “It is to adore
someone.”“That is certainly better than being adored,” he answered, toying
withsome fruits. “Being adored is a nuisance. Women treat us just ashumanity
treats its gods. They worship us, and are always bothering usto do something for
them.”“I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given tous,”
murmured the lad gravely. “They create love in our natures. Theyhave a right to
demand it back.”“That is quite true, Dorian,” cried Hallward.“Nothing is ever
quite true,” said Lord Henry.“This is,” interrupted Dorian. “You must admit,
Harry, that women giveto men the very gold of their lives.”“Possibly,” he
sighed, “but they invariably want it back in such verysmall change. That is the
worry. Women, as some witty Frenchman onceput it, inspire us with the desire to
do masterpieces and alwaysprevent us from carrying them out.”“Harry, you are
dreadful! I don’t know why I like you so much.”“You will always like me,
Dorian,” he replied. “Will you have somecoffee, you fellows? Waiter, bring
coffee, and _fine-champagne_, andsome cigarettes. No, don’t mind the
cigarettes—I have some. Basil, Ican’t allow you to smoke cigars. You must have a
cigarette. A cigaretteis the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. It is
exquisite, and itleaves one unsatisfied. What more can one want? Yes, Dorian,
you willalways be fond of me. I represent to you all the sins you have neverhad
the courage to commit.”“What nonsense you talk, Harry!” cried the lad, taking a
light from afire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the
table.“Let us go down to the theatre. When Sibyl comes on the stage you willhave
a new ideal of life. She will represent something to you that youhave never
known.”“I have known everything,” said Lord Henry, with a tired look in hiseyes,
“but I am always ready for a new emotion. I am afraid, however,that, for me at
any rate, there is no such thing. Still, your wonderfulgirl may thrill me. I
love acting. It is so much more real than life.Let us go. Dorian, you will come
with me. I am so sorry, Basil, butthere is only room for two in the brougham.
You must follow us in ahansom.”They got up and put on their coats, sipping their
coffee standing. Thepainter was silent and preoccupied. There was a gloom over
him. Hecould not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be betterthan
many other things that might have happened. After a few minutes,they all passed
downstairs. He drove off by himself, as had beenarranged, and watched the
flashing lights of the little brougham infront of him. A strange sense of loss
came over him. He felt thatDorian Gray would never again be to him all that he
had been in thepast. Life had come between them.... His eyes darkened, and the
crowdedflaring streets became blurred to his eyes. When the cab drew up at
thetheatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.CHAPTER VII.For some
reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fatJew manager who
met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear withan oily tremulous smile. He
escorted them to their box with a sort ofpompous humility, waving his fat
jewelled hands and talking at the topof his voice. Dorian Gray loathed him more
than ever. He felt as if hehad come to look for Miranda and had been met by
Caliban. Lord Henry,upon the other hand, rather liked him. At least he declared
he did, andinsisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he was
proudto meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over
apoet. Hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit. Theheat was
terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight flamed like amonstrous dahlia with
petals of yellow fire. The youths in the galleryhad taken off their coats and
waistcoats and hung them over the side.They talked to each other across the
theatre and shared their orangeswith the tawdry girls who sat beside them. Some
women were laughing inthe pit. Their voices were horribly shrill and discordant.
The sound ofthe popping of corks came from the bar.“What a place to find one’s
divinity in!” said Lord Henry.“Yes!” answered Dorian Gray. “It was here I found
her, and she isdivine beyond all living things. When she acts, you will
forgeteverything. These common rough people, with their coarse faces andbrutal
gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage. Theysit silently and
watch her. They weep and laugh as she wills them todo. She makes them as
responsive as a violin. She spiritualizes them,and one feels that they are of
the same flesh and blood as one’s self.”“The same flesh and blood as one’s self!
Oh, I hope not!” exclaimedLord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the
gallery through hisopera-glass.“Don’t pay any attention to him, Dorian,” said
the painter. “Iunderstand what you mean, and I believe in this girl. Any one you
lovemust be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe mustbe fine
and noble. To spiritualize one’s age—that is something worthdoing. If this girl
can give a soul to those who have lived withoutone, if she can create the sense
of beauty in people whose lives havebeen sordid and ugly, if she can strip them
of their selfishness andlend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she
is worthy ofall your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world. This
marriageis quite right. I did not think so at first, but I admit it now. Thegods
made Sibyl Vane for you. Without her you would have beenincomplete.”“Thanks,
Basil,” answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand. “I knew thatyou would
understand me. Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me. But hereis the orchestra.
It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for aboutfive minutes. Then the curtain
rises, and you will see the girl to whomI am going to give all my life, to whom
I have given everything that isgood in me.”A quarter of an hour afterwards,
amidst an extraordinary turmoil ofapplause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage.
Yes, she was certainlylovely to look at—one of the loveliest creatures, Lord
Henry thought,that he had ever seen. There was something of the fawn in her shy
graceand startled eyes. A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirrorof
silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowdedenthusiastic house. She
stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed totremble. Basil Hallward leaped to
his feet and began to applaud.Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian
Gray, gazing at her. LordHenry peered through his glasses, murmuring, “Charming!
charming!”The scene was the hall of Capulet’s house, and Romeo in his
pilgrim’sdress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends. The band, suchas
it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began. Throughthe crowd of
ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like acreature from a finer
world. Her body swayed, while she danced, as aplant sways in the water. The
curves of her throat were the curves of awhite lily. Her hands seemed to be made
of cool ivory.Yet she was curiously listless. She showed no sign of joy when her
eyesrested on Romeo. The few words she had to speak—Good pilgrim, you do wrong
your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this;For saints have hands
that pilgrims’ hands do touch, And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss—with the
brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughlyartificial manner. The
voice was exquisite, but from the point of viewof tone it was absolutely false.
It was wrong in colour. It took awayall the life from the verse. It made the
passion unreal.Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her. He was puzzled and
anxious.Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him. She seemed to
themto be absolutely incompetent. They were horribly disappointed.Yet they felt
that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene ofthe second act. They
waited for that. If she failed there, there wasnothing in her.She looked
charming as she came out in the moonlight. That could not bedenied. But the
staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew worseas she went on. Her
gestures became absurdly artificial. Sheoveremphasized everything that she had
to say. The beautiful passage—Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,Else
would a maiden blush bepaint my cheekFor that which thou hast heard me speak
to-night—was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has
beentaught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. When sheleaned
over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines—Although I joy in thee,I have
no joy of this contract to-night:It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;Too
like the lightning, which doth cease to beEre one can say, “It lightens.” Sweet,
good-night!This bud of love by summer’s ripening breathMay prove a beauteous
flower when next we meet—she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning
to her. It wasnot nervousness. Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was
absolutelyself-contained. It was simply bad art. She was a complete failure.Even
the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost theirinterest in the
play. They got restless, and began to talk loudly andto whistle. The Jew
manager, who was standing at the back of thedress-circle, stamped and swore with
rage. The only person unmoved wasthe girl herself.When the second act was over,
there came a storm of hisses, and LordHenry got up from his chair and put on his
coat. “She is quitebeautiful, Dorian,” he said, “but she can’t act. Let us
go.”“I am going to see the play through,” answered the lad, in a hardbitter
voice. “I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste anevening, Harry. I
apologize to you both.”“My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill,”
interruptedHallward. “We will come some other night.”“I wish she were ill,” he
rejoined. “But she seems to me to be simplycallous and cold. She has entirely
altered. Last night she was a greatartist. This evening she is merely a
commonplace mediocre actress.”“Don’t talk like that about any one you love,
Dorian. Love is a morewonderful thing than art.”“They are both simply forms of
imitation,” remarked Lord Henry. “But dolet us go. Dorian, you must not stay
here any longer. It is not goodfor one’s morals to see bad acting. Besides, I
don’t suppose you willwant your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays
Juliet likea wooden doll? She is very lovely, and if she knows as little
aboutlife as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience.There
are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating—peoplewho know
absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing.Good heavens, my
dear boy, don’t look so tragic! The secret ofremaining young is never to have an
emotion that is unbecoming. Come tothe club with Basil and myself. We will smoke
cigarettes and drink tothe beauty of Sibyl Vane. She is beautiful. What more can
you want?”“Go away, Harry,” cried the lad. “I want to be alone. Basil, you
mustgo. Ah! can’t you see that my heart is breaking?” The hot tears came tohis
eyes. His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, heleaned up against
the wall, hiding his face in his hands.“Let us go, Basil,” said Lord Henry with
a strange tenderness in hisvoice, and the two young men passed out together.A
few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain roseon the third
act. Dorian Gray went back to his seat. He looked pale,and proud, and
indifferent. The play dragged on, and seemedinterminable. Half of the audience
went out, tramping in heavy bootsand laughing. The whole thing was a _fiasco_.
The last act was playedto almost empty benches. The curtain went down on a
titter and somegroans.As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the
scenes into thegreenroom. The girl was standing there alone, with a look of
triumph onher face. Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire. There was
aradiance about her. Her parted lips were smiling over some secret oftheir
own.When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joycame
over her. “How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!” she cried.“Horribly!” he
answered, gazing at her in amazement. “Horribly! It wasdreadful. Are you ill?
You have no idea what it was. You have no ideawhat I suffered.”The girl smiled.
“Dorian,” she answered, lingering over his name withlong-drawn music in her
voice, as though it were sweeter than honey tothe red petals of her mouth.
“Dorian, you should have understood. Butyou understand now, don’t
you?”“Understand what?” he asked, angrily.“Why I was so bad to-night. Why I
shall always be bad. Why I shallnever act well again.”He shrugged his shoulders.
“You are ill, I suppose. When you are illyou shouldn’t act. You make yourself
ridiculous. My friends were bored.I was bored.”She seemed not to listen to him.
She was transfigured with joy. Anecstasy of happiness dominated her.“Dorian,
Dorian,” she cried, “before I knew you, acting was the onereality of my life. It
was only in the theatre that I lived. I thoughtthat it was all true. I was
Rosalind one night and Portia the other.The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the
sorrows of Cordelia were minealso. I believed in everything. The common people
who acted with meseemed to me to be godlike. The painted scenes were my world. I
knewnothing but shadows, and I thought them real. You came—oh, my
beautifullove!—and you freed my soul from prison. You taught me what
realityreally is. To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw through
thehollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I hadalways
played. To-night, for the first time, I became conscious thatthe Romeo was
hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in theorchard was false, that
the scenery was vulgar, and that the words Ihad to speak were unreal, were not
my words, were not what I wanted tosay. You had brought me something higher,
something of which all art isbut a reflection. You had made me understand what
love really is. Mylove! My love! Prince Charming! Prince of life! I have grown
sick ofshadows. You are more to me than all art can ever be. What have I to
dowith the puppets of a play? When I came on to-night, I could notunderstand how
it was that everything had gone from me. I thought thatI was going to be
wonderful. I found that I could do nothing. Suddenlyit dawned on my soul what it
all meant. The knowledge was exquisite tome. I heard them hissing, and I smiled.
What could they know of lovesuch as ours? Take me away, Dorian—take me away with
you, where we canbe quite alone. I hate the stage. I might mimic a passion that
I do notfeel, but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire. Oh, Dorian,Dorian,
you understand now what it signifies? Even if I could do it, itwould be
profanation for me to play at being in love. You have made mesee that.”He flung
himself down on the sofa and turned away his face. “You havekilled my love,” he
muttered.She looked at him in wonder and laughed. He made no answer. She
cameacross to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair. She kneltdown
and pressed his hands to her lips. He drew them away, and ashudder ran through
him.Then he leaped up and went to the door. “Yes,” he cried, “you havekilled my
love. You used to stir my imagination. Now you don’t evenstir my curiosity. You
simply produce no effect. I loved you becauseyou were marvellous, because you
had genius and intellect, because yourealized the dreams of great poets and gave
shape and substance to theshadows of art. You have thrown it all away. You are
shallow andstupid. My God! how mad I was to love you! What a fool I have been!
Youare nothing to me now. I will never see you again. I will never thinkof you.
I will never mention your name. You don’t know what you were tome, once. Why,
once ... Oh, I can’t bear to think of it! I wish I hadnever laid eyes upon you!
You have spoiled the romance of my life. Howlittle you can know of love, if you
say it mars your art! Without yourart, you are nothing. I would have made you
famous, splendid,magnificent. The world would have worshipped you, and you would
haveborne my name. What are you now? A third-rate actress with a prettyface.”The
girl grew white, and trembled. She clenched her hands together, andher voice
seemed to catch in her throat. “You are not serious, Dorian?”she murmured. “You
are acting.”“Acting! I leave that to you. You do it so well,” he answered
bitterly.She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in
herface, came across the room to him. She put her hand upon his arm andlooked
into his eyes. He thrust her back. “Don’t touch me!” he cried.A low moan broke
from her, and she flung herself at his feet and laythere like a trampled flower.
“Dorian, Dorian, don’t leave me!” shewhispered. “I am so sorry I didn’t act
well. I was thinking of you allthe time. But I will try—indeed, I will try. It
came so suddenly acrossme, my love for you. I think I should never have known it
if you hadnot kissed me—if we had not kissed each other. Kiss me again, my
love.Don’t go away from me. I couldn’t bear it. Oh! don’t go away from me.My
brother ... No; never mind. He didn’t mean it. He was in jest....But you, oh!
can’t you forgive me for to-night? I will work so hard andtry to improve. Don’t
be cruel to me, because I love you better thananything in the world. After all,
it is only once that I have notpleased you. But you are quite right, Dorian. I
should have shownmyself more of an artist. It was foolish of me, and yet I
couldn’t helpit. Oh, don’t leave me, don’t leave me.” A fit of passionate
sobbingchoked her. She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and
DorianGray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselledlips
curled in exquisite disdain. There is always something ridiculousabout the
emotions of people whom one has ceased to love. Sibyl Vaneseemed to him to be
absurdly melodramatic. Her tears and sobs annoyedhim.“I am going,” he said at
last in his calm clear voice. “I don’t wish tobe unkind, but I can’t see you
again. You have disappointed me.”She wept silently, and made no answer, but
crept nearer. Her littlehands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking
for him. Heturned on his heel and left the room. In a few moments he was out
ofthe theatre.Where he went to he hardly knew. He remembered wandering through
dimlylit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-lookinghouses.
Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called afterhim. Drunkards had
reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves likemonstrous apes. He had seen
grotesque children huddled upon door-steps,and heard shrieks and oaths from
gloomy courts.As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent
Garden.The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky
holloweditself into a perfect pearl. Huge carts filled with nodding
liliesrumbled slowly down the polished empty street. The air was heavy withthe
perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him ananodyne for his
pain. He followed into the market and watched the menunloading their waggons. A
white-smocked carter offered him somecherries. He thanked him, wondered why he
refused to accept any moneyfor them, and began to eat them listlessly. They had
been plucked atmidnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them. A
longline of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and redroses,
defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge,jade-green piles
of vegetables. Under the portico, with its grey,sun-bleached pillars, loitered a
troop of draggled bareheaded girls,waiting for the auction to be over. Others
crowded round the swingingdoors of the coffee-house in the piazza. The heavy
cart-horses slippedand stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and
trappings.Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks.
Iris-neckedand pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.After a
little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home. For a fewmoments he loitered
upon the doorstep, looking round at the silentsquare, with its blank,
close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.The sky was pure opal now, and
the roofs of the houses glistened likesilver against it. From some chimney
opposite a thin wreath of smokewas rising. It curled, a violet riband, through
the nacre-coloured air.In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge’s
barge, thathung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of
entrance,lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue
petalsof flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire. He turned them out
and,having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the
librarytowards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on theground
floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just haddecorated for
himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestriesthat had been
discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal. Ashe was turning the handle
of the door, his eye fell upon the portraitBasil Hallward had painted of him. He
started back as if in surprise.Then he went on into his own room, looking
somewhat puzzled. After hehad taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed
to hesitate.Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it.
Inthe dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silkblinds,
the face appeared to him to be a little changed. The expressionlooked different.
One would have said that there was a touch of crueltyin the mouth. It was
certainly strange.He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind.
Thebright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into
duskycorners, where they lay shuddering. But the strange expression that hehad
noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to bemore
intensified even. The quivering ardent sunlight showed him thelines of cruelty
round the mouth as clearly as if he had been lookinginto a mirror after he had
done some dreadful thing.He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass
framed in ivoryCupids, one of Lord Henry’s many presents to him, glanced
hurriedlyinto its polished depths. No line like that warped his red lips.
Whatdid it mean?He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined
itagain. There were no signs of any change when he looked into the
actualpainting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression hadaltered.
It was not a mere fancy of his own. The thing was horriblyapparent.He threw
himself into a chair and began to think. Suddenly thereflashed across his mind
what he had said in Basil Hallward’s studio theday the picture had been
finished. Yes, he remembered it perfectly. Hehad uttered a mad wish that he
himself might remain young, and theportrait grow old; that his own beauty might
be untarnished, and theface on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and
his sins; thatthe painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering
andthought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and lovelinessof his
then just conscious boyhood. Surely his wish had not beenfulfilled? Such things
were impossible. It seemed monstrous even tothink of them. And, yet, there was
the picture before him, with thetouch of cruelty in the mouth.Cruelty! Had he
been cruel? It was the girl’s fault, not his. He haddreamed of her as a great
artist, had given his love to her because hehad thought her great. Then she had
disappointed him. She had beenshallow and unworthy. And, yet, a feeling of
infinite regret came overhim, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing
like a littlechild. He remembered with what callousness he had watched her. Why
hadhe been made like that? Why had such a soul been given to him? But hehad
suffered also. During the three terrible hours that the play hadlasted, he had
lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of torture. Hislife was well worth hers.
She had marred him for a moment, if he hadwounded her for an age. Besides, women
were better suited to bearsorrow than men. They lived on their emotions. They
only thought oftheir emotions. When they took lovers, it was merely to have some
onewith whom they could have scenes. Lord Henry had told him that, andLord Henry
knew what women were. Why should he trouble about SibylVane? She was nothing to
him now.But the picture? What was he to say of that? It held the secret of
hislife, and told his story. It had taught him to love his own beauty.Would it
teach him to loathe his own soul? Would he ever look at itagain?No; it was
merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses. Thehorrible night that he had
passed had left phantoms behind it. Suddenlythere had fallen upon his brain that
tiny scarlet speck that makes menmad. The picture had not changed. It was folly
to think so.Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its
cruelsmile. Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight. Its blue eyes methis
own. A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the paintedimage of
himself, came over him. It had altered already, and wouldalter more. Its gold
would wither into grey. Its red and white roseswould die. For every sin that he
committed, a stain would fleck andwreck its fairness. But he would not sin. The
picture, changed orunchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience.
He wouldresist temptation. He would not see Lord Henry any more—would not, atany
rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in BasilHallward’s garden
had first stirred within him the passion forimpossible things. He would go back
to Sibyl Vane, make her amends,marry her, try to love her again. Yes, it was his
duty to do so. Shemust have suffered more than he had. Poor child! He had been
selfishand cruel to her. The fascination that she had exercised over him
wouldreturn. They would be happy together. His life with her would bebeautiful
and pure.He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of
theportrait, shuddering as he glanced at it. “How horrible!” he murmuredto
himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it. When hestepped out on
to the grass, he drew a deep breath. The fresh morningair seemed to drive away
all his sombre passions. He thought only ofSibyl. A faint echo of his love came
back to him. He repeated her nameover and over again. The birds that were
singing in the dew-drenchedgarden seemed to be telling the flowers about
her.CHAPTER VIII.It was long past noon when he awoke. His valet had crept
several timeson tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had
wonderedwhat made his young master sleep so late. Finally his bell sounded,
andVictor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on asmall
tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin curtains,with their
shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the three tallwindows.“Monsieur
has well slept this morning,” he said, smiling.“What o’clock is it, Victor?”
asked Dorian Gray drowsily.“One hour and a quarter, Monsieur.”How late it was!
He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over hisletters. One of them was
from Lord Henry, and had been brought by handthat morning. He hesitated for a
moment, and then put it aside. Theothers he opened listlessly. They contained
the usual collection ofcards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views,
programmes ofcharity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable
youngmen every morning during the season. There was a rather heavy bill fora
chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had thecourage to send
on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashionedpeople and did not realize
that we live in an age when unnecessarythings are our only necessities; and
there were several verycourteously worded communications from Jermyn Street
money-lendersoffering to advance any sum of money at a moment’s notice and at
themost reasonable rates of interest.After about ten minutes he got up, and
throwing on an elaboratedressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed
into theonyx-paved bathroom. The cool water refreshed him after his long
sleep.He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through. A dim senseof
having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice,but there
was the unreality of a dream about it.As soon as he was dressed, he went into
the library and sat down to alight French breakfast that had been laid out for
him on a small roundtable close to the open window. It was an exquisite day. The
warm airseemed laden with spices. A bee flew in and buzzed round theblue-dragon
bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood beforehim. He felt perfectly
happy.Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of
theportrait, and he started.“Too cold for Monsieur?” asked his valet, putting an
omelette on thetable. “I shut the window?”Dorian shook his head. “I am not
cold,” he murmured.Was it all true? Had the portrait really changed? Or had it
been simplyhis own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where
therehad been a look of joy? Surely a painted canvas could not alter? Thething
was absurd. It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day. Itwould make him
smile.And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing! First inthe
dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch ofcruelty round
the warped lips. He almost dreaded his valet leaving theroom. He knew that when
he was alone he would have to examine theportrait. He was afraid of certainty.
When the coffee and cigaretteshad been brought and the man turned to go, he felt
a wild desire totell him to remain. As the door was closing behind him, he
called himback. The man stood waiting for his orders. Dorian looked at him for
amoment. “I am not at home to any one, Victor,” he said with a sigh. Theman
bowed and retired.Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung
himself down ona luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen. The
screenwas an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with arather
florid Louis-Quatorze pattern. He scanned it curiously,wondering if ever before
it had concealed the secret of a man’s life.Should he move it aside, after all?
Why not let it stay there? What wasthe use of knowing? If the thing was true, it
was terrible. If it wasnot true, why trouble about it? But what if, by some fate
or deadlierchance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible
change?What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his
ownpicture? Basil would be sure to do that. No; the thing had to beexamined, and
at once. Anything would be better than this dreadfulstate of doubt.He got up and
locked both doors. At least he would be alone when helooked upon the mask of his
shame. Then he drew the screen aside andsaw himself face to face. It was
perfectly true. The portrait hadaltered.As he often remembered afterwards, and
always with no small wonder, hefound himself at first gazing at the portrait
with a feeling of almostscientific interest. That such a change should have
taken place wasincredible to him. And yet it was a fact. Was there some
subtleaffinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into formand
colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him? Could it bethat what that
soul thought, they realized?—that what it dreamed, theymade true? Or was there
some other, more terrible reason? He shuddered,and felt afraid, and, going back
to the couch, lay there, gazing at thepicture in sickened horror.One thing,
however, he felt that it had done for him. It had made himconscious how unjust,
how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane. It was nottoo late to make reparation for
that. She could still be his wife. Hisunreal and selfish love would yield to
some higher influence, would betransformed into some nobler passion, and the
portrait that BasilHallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through
life, wouldbe to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and
thefear of God to us all. There were opiates for remorse, drugs that couldlull
the moral sense to sleep. But here was a visible symbol of thedegradation of
sin. Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin menbrought upon their souls.Three
o’clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its doublechime, but Dorian
Gray did not stir. He was trying to gather up thescarlet threads of life and to
weave them into a pattern; to find hisway through the sanguine labyrinth of
passion through which he waswandering. He did not know what to do, or what to
think. Finally, hewent over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the
girl he hadloved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness.
Hecovered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words ofpain.
There is a luxury in self-reproach. When we blame ourselves, wefeel that no one
else has a right to blame us. It is the confession,not the priest, that gives us
absolution. When Dorian had finished theletter, he felt that he had been
forgiven.Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry’svoice
outside. “My dear boy, I must see you. Let me in at once. I can’tbear your
shutting yourself up like this.”He made no answer at first, but remained quite
still. The knockingstill continued and grew louder. Yes, it was better to let
Lord Henryin, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to
quarrelwith him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting
wasinevitable. He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture,and
unlocked the door.“I am so sorry for it all, Dorian,” said Lord Henry as he
entered. “Butyou must not think too much about it.”“Do you mean about Sibyl
Vane?” asked the lad.“Yes, of course,” answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair
and slowlypulling off his yellow gloves. “It is dreadful, from one point of
view,but it was not your fault. Tell me, did you go behind and see her,after the
play was over?”“Yes.”“I felt sure you had. Did you make a scene with her?”“I was
brutal, Harry—perfectly brutal. But it is all right now. I amnot sorry for
anything that has happened. It has taught me to knowmyself better.”“Ah, Dorian,
I am so glad you take it in that way! I was afraid I wouldfind you plunged in
remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours.”“I have got through all
that,” said Dorian, shaking his head andsmiling. “I am perfectly happy now. I
know what conscience is, to beginwith. It is not what you told me it was. It is
the divinest thing inus. Don’t sneer at it, Harry, any more—at least not before
me. I wantto be good. I can’t bear the idea of my soul being hideous.”“A very
charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian! I congratulate youon it. But how are
you going to begin?”“By marrying Sibyl Vane.”“Marrying Sibyl Vane!” cried Lord
Henry, standing up and looking at himin perplexed amazement. “But, my dear
Dorian—”“Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say. Something dreadful
aboutmarriage. Don’t say it. Don’t ever say things of that kind to me again.Two
days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me. I am not going to break my wordto her. She
is to be my wife.”“Your wife! Dorian! ... Didn’t you get my letter? I wrote to
you thismorning, and sent the note down by my own man.”“Your letter? Oh, yes, I
remember. I have not read it yet, Harry. I wasafraid there might be something in
it that I wouldn’t like. You cutlife to pieces with your epigrams.”“You know
nothing then?”“What do you mean?”Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting
down by Dorian Gray,took both his hands in his own and held them tightly.
“Dorian,” hesaid, “my letter—don’t be frightened—was to tell you that Sibyl Vane
isdead.”A cry of pain broke from the lad’s lips, and he leaped to his
feet,tearing his hands away from Lord Henry’s grasp. “Dead! Sibyl dead! Itis not
true! It is a horrible lie! How dare you say it?”“It is quite true, Dorian,”
said Lord Henry, gravely. “It is in all themorning papers. I wrote down to you
to ask you not to see any one tillI came. There will have to be an inquest, of
course, and you must notbe mixed up in it. Things like that make a man
fashionable in Paris.But in London people are so prejudiced. Here, one should
never makeone’s _début_ with a scandal. One should reserve that to give
aninterest to one’s old age. I suppose they don’t know your name at thetheatre?
If they don’t, it is all right. Did any one see you goinground to her room? That
is an important point.”Dorian did not answer for a few moments. He was dazed
with horror.Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, “Harry, did you say
aninquest? What did you mean by that? Did Sibyl—? Oh, Harry, I can’t bearit! But
be quick. Tell me everything at once.”“I have no doubt it was not an accident,
Dorian, though it must be putin that way to the public. It seems that as she was
leaving the theatrewith her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she
hadforgotten something upstairs. They waited some time for her, but shedid not
come down again. They ultimately found her lying dead on thefloor of her
dressing-room. She had swallowed something by mistake,some dreadful thing they
use at theatres. I don’t know what it was, butit had either prussic acid or
white lead in it. I should fancy it wasprussic acid, as she seems to have died
instantaneously.”“Harry, Harry, it is terrible!” cried the lad.“Yes; it is very
tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixedup in it. I see by _The
Standard_ that she was seventeen. I should havethought she was almost younger
than that. She looked such a child, andseemed to know so little about acting.
Dorian, you mustn’t let thisthing get on your nerves. You must come and dine
with me, andafterwards we will look in at the opera. It is a Patti night,
andeverybody will be there. You can come to my sister’s box. She has gotsome
smart women with her.”“So I have murdered Sibyl Vane,” said Dorian Gray, half to
himself,“murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a
knife.Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that. The birds sing just
ashappily in my garden. And to-night I am to dine with you, and then goon to the
opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards. Howextraordinarily dramatic
life is! If I had read all this in a book,Harry, I think I would have wept over
it. Somehow, now that it hashappened actually, and to me, it seems far too
wonderful for tears.Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written
in mylife. Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have
beenaddressed to a dead girl. Can they feel, I wonder, those white silentpeople
we call the dead? Sibyl! Can she feel, or know, or listen? Oh,Harry, how I loved
her once! It seems years ago to me now. She waseverything to me. Then came that
dreadful night—was it really only lastnight?—when she played so badly, and my
heart almost broke. Sheexplained it all to me. It was terribly pathetic. But I
was not moved abit. I thought her shallow. Suddenly something happened that made
meafraid. I can’t tell you what it was, but it was terrible. I said Iwould go
back to her. I felt I had done wrong. And now she is dead. MyGod! My God! Harry,
what shall I do? You don’t know the danger I am in,and there is nothing to keep
me straight. She would have done that forme. She had no right to kill herself.
It was selfish of her.”“My dear Dorian,” answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette
from his caseand producing a gold-latten matchbox, “the only way a woman can
everreform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all
possibleinterest in life. If you had married this girl, you would have
beenwretched. Of course, you would have treated her kindly. One can alwaysbe
kind to people about whom one cares nothing. But she would have soonfound out
that you were absolutely indifferent to her. And when a womanfinds that out
about her husband, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy,or wears very smart
bonnets that some other woman’s husband has to payfor. I say nothing about the
social mistake, which would have beenabject—which, of course, I would not have
allowed—but I assure you thatin any case the whole thing would have been an
absolute failure.”“I suppose it would,” muttered the lad, walking up and down
the roomand looking horribly pale. “But I thought it was my duty. It is not
myfault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right.I
remember your saying once that there is a fatality about goodresolutions—that
they are always made too late. Mine certainly were.”“Good resolutions are
useless attempts to interfere with scientificlaws. Their origin is pure vanity.
Their result is absolutely _nil_.They give us, now and then, some of those
luxurious sterile emotionsthat have a certain charm for the weak. That is all
that can be saidfor them. They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where
theyhave no account.”“Harry,” cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down
beside him,“why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to?
Idon’t think I am heartless. Do you?”“You have done too many foolish things
during the last fortnight to beentitled to give yourself that name, Dorian,”
answered Lord Henry withhis sweet melancholy smile.The lad frowned. “I don’t
like that explanation, Harry,” he rejoined,“but I am glad you don’t think I am
heartless. I am nothing of thekind. I know I am not. And yet I must admit that
this thing that hashappened does not affect me as it should. It seems to me to
be simplylike a wonderful ending to a wonderful play. It has all the
terriblebeauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, butby
which I have not been wounded.”“It is an interesting question,” said Lord Henry,
who found anexquisite pleasure in playing on the lad’s unconscious egotism,
“anextremely interesting question. I fancy that the true explanation isthis: It
often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such aninartistic manner
that they hurt us by their crude violence, theirabsolute incoherence, their
absurd want of meaning, their entire lackof style. They affect us just as
vulgarity affects us. They give us animpression of sheer brute force, and we
revolt against that. Sometimes,however, a tragedy that possesses artistic
elements of beauty crossesour lives. If these elements of beauty are real, the
whole thing simplyappeals to our sense of dramatic effect. Suddenly we find that
we areno longer the actors, but the spectators of the play. Or rather we
areboth. We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacleenthralls us.
In the present case, what is it that has really happened?Some one has killed
herself for love of you. I wish that I had ever hadsuch an experience. It would
have made me in love with love for therest of my life. The people who have
adored me—there have not been verymany, but there have been some—have always
insisted on living on, longafter I had ceased to care for them, or they to care
for me. They havebecome stout and tedious, and when I meet them, they go in at
once forreminiscences. That awful memory of woman! What a fearful thing it
is!And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals! One should absorbthe
colour of life, but one should never remember its details. Detailsare always
vulgar.”“I must sow poppies in my garden,” sighed Dorian.“There is no
necessity,” rejoined his companion. “Life has alwayspoppies in her hands. Of
course, now and then things linger. I oncewore nothing but violets all through
one season, as a form of artisticmourning for a romance that would not die.
Ultimately, however, it diddie. I forget what killed it. I think it was her
proposing to sacrificethe whole world for me. That is always a dreadful moment.
It fills onewith the terror of eternity. Well—would you believe it?—a week ago,
atLady Hampshire’s, I found myself seated at dinner next the lady inquestion,
and she insisted on going over the whole thing again, anddigging up the past,
and raking up the future. I had buried my romancein a bed of asphodel. She
dragged it out again and assured me that Ihad spoiled her life. I am bound to
state that she ate an enormousdinner, so I did not feel any anxiety. But what a
lack of taste sheshowed! The one charm of the past is that it is the past. But
womennever know when the curtain has fallen. They always want a sixth act,and as
soon as the interest of the play is entirely over, they proposeto continue it.
If they were allowed their own way, every comedy wouldhave a tragic ending, and
every tragedy would culminate in a farce.They are charmingly artificial, but
they have no sense of art. You aremore fortunate than I am. I assure you,
Dorian, that not one of thewomen I have known would have done for me what Sibyl
Vane did for you.Ordinary women always console themselves. Some of them do it by
goingin for sentimental colours. Never trust a woman who wears mauve,whatever
her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who is fond ofpink ribbons. It
always means that they have a history. Others find agreat consolation in
suddenly discovering the good qualities of theirhusbands. They flaunt their
conjugal felicity in one’s face, as if itwere the most fascinating of sins.
Religion consoles some. Itsmysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a woman
once told me, andI can quite understand it. Besides, nothing makes one so vain
as beingtold that one is a sinner. Conscience makes egotists of us all.
Yes;there is really no end to the consolations that women find in modernlife.
Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important one.”“What is that, Harry?” said
the lad listlessly.“Oh, the obvious consolation. Taking some one else’s admirer
when oneloses one’s own. In good society that always whitewashes a woman.
Butreally, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all thewomen one
meets! There is something to me quite beautiful about herdeath. I am glad I am
living in a century when such wonders happen.They make one believe in the
reality of the things we all play with,such as romance, passion, and love.”“I
was terribly cruel to her. You forget that.”“I am afraid that women appreciate
cruelty, downright cruelty, morethan anything else. They have wonderfully
primitive instincts. We haveemancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for
their masters, allthe same. They love being dominated. I am sure you were
splendid. Ihave never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can fancy
howdelightful you looked. And, after all, you said something to me the daybefore
yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful,but that I see now
was absolutely true, and it holds the key toeverything.”“What was that,
Harry?”“You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines
ofromance—that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; thatif she
died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen.”“She will never come to life again
now,” muttered the lad, burying hisface in his hands.“No, she will never come to
life. She has played her last part. But youmust think of that lonely death in
the tawdry dressing-room simply as astrange lurid fragment from some Jacobean
tragedy, as a wonderful scenefrom Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur. The girl
never really lived,and so she has never really died. To you at least she was
always adream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare’s plays and left
themlovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare’s musicsounded
richer and more full of joy. The moment she touched actuallife, she marred it,
and it marred her, and so she passed away. Mournfor Ophelia, if you like. Put
ashes on your head because Cordelia wasstrangled. Cry out against Heaven because
the daughter of Brabantiodied. But don’t waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. She
was less realthan they are.”There was a silence. The evening darkened in the
room. Noiselessly, andwith silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden.
The coloursfaded wearily out of things.After some time Dorian Gray looked up.
“You have explained me tomyself, Harry,” he murmured with something of a sigh of
relief. “I feltall that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I
could notexpress it to myself. How well you know me! But we will not talk
againof what has happened. It has been a marvellous experience. That is all.I
wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous.”“Life has
everything in store for you, Dorian. There is nothing thatyou, with your
extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do.”“But suppose, Harry, I became
haggard, and old, and wrinkled? Whatthen?”“Ah, then,” said Lord Henry, rising to
go, “then, my dear Dorian, youwould have to fight for your victories. As it is,
they are brought toyou. No, you must keep your good looks. We live in an age
that readstoo much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful.
Wecannot spare you. And now you had better dress and drive down to theclub. We
are rather late, as it is.”“I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry. I feel
too tired to eatanything. What is the number of your sister’s
box?”“Twenty-seven, I believe. It is on the grand tier. You will see hername on
the door. But I am sorry you won’t come and dine.”“I don’t feel up to it,” said
Dorian listlessly. “But I am awfullyobliged to you for all that you have said to
me. You are certainly mybest friend. No one has ever understood me as you
have.”“We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian,” answered
LordHenry, shaking him by the hand. “Good-bye. I shall see you
beforenine-thirty, I hope. Remember, Patti is singing.”As he closed the door
behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and ina few minutes Victor appeared
with the lamps and drew the blinds down.He waited impatiently for him to go. The
man seemed to take aninterminable time over everything.As soon as he had left,
he rushed to the screen and drew it back. No;there was no further change in the
picture. It had received the news ofSibyl Vane’s death before he had known of it
himself. It was consciousof the events of life as they occurred. The vicious
cruelty that marredthe fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the
very momentthat the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was. Or was
itindifferent to results? Did it merely take cognizance of what passedwithin the
soul? He wondered, and hoped that some day he would see thechange taking place
before his very eyes, shuddering as he hoped it.Poor Sibyl! What a romance it
had all been! She had often mimickeddeath on the stage. Then Death himself had
touched her and taken herwith him. How had she played that dreadful last scene?
Had she cursedhim, as she died? No; she had died for love of him, and love
wouldalways be a sacrament to him now. She had atoned for everything by
thesacrifice she had made of her life. He would not think any more of whatshe
had made him go through, on that horrible night at the theatre.When he thought
of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic figure senton to the world’s stage to
show the supreme reality of love. Awonderful tragic figure? Tears came to his
eyes as he remembered herchildlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy
tremulous grace. Hebrushed them away hastily and looked again at the picture.He
felt that the time had really come for making his choice. Or had hischoice
already been made? Yes, life had decided that for him—life, andhis own infinite
curiosity about life. Eternal youth, infinite passion,pleasures subtle and
secret, wild joys and wilder sins—he was to haveall these things. The portrait
was to bear the burden of his shame:that was all.A feeling of pain crept over
him as he thought of the desecration thatwas in store for the fair face on the
canvas. Once, in boyish mockeryof Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss,
those painted lipsthat now smiled so cruelly at him. Morning after morning he
had satbefore the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, asit
seemed to him at times. Was it to alter now with every mood to whichhe yielded?
Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to behidden away in a locked
room, to be shut out from the sunlight that hadso often touched to brighter gold
the waving wonder of its hair? Thepity of it! the pity of it!For a moment, he
thought of praying that the horrible sympathy thatexisted between him and the
picture might cease. It had changed inanswer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a
prayer it might remainunchanged. And yet, who, that knew anything about life,
would surrenderthe chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that
chancemight be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?Besides,
was it really under his control? Had it indeed been prayerthat had produced the
substitution? Might there not be some curiousscientific reason for it all? If
thought could exercise its influenceupon a living organism, might not thought
exercise an influence upondead and inorganic things? Nay, without thought or
conscious desire,might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with
our moodsand passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange
affinity?But the reason was of no importance. He would never again tempt by
aprayer any terrible power. If the picture was to alter, it was toalter. That
was all. Why inquire too closely into it?For there would be a real pleasure in
watching it. He would be able tofollow his mind into its secret places. This
portrait would be to himthe most magical of mirrors. As it had revealed to him
his own body, soit would reveal to him his own soul. And when winter came upon
it, hewould still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer.When
the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask ofchalk with leaden
eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood. Not oneblossom of his loveliness
would ever fade. Not one pulse of his lifewould ever weaken. Like the gods of
the Greeks, he would be strong, andfleet, and joyous. What did it matter what
happened to the colouredimage on the canvas? He would be safe. That was
everything.He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the
picture,smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet
wasalready waiting for him. An hour later he was at the opera, and LordHenry was
leaning over his chair.CHAPTER IX.As he was sitting at breakfast next morning,
Basil Hallward was showninto the room.“I am so glad I have found you, Dorian,”
he said gravely. “I calledlast night, and they told me you were at the opera. Of
course, I knewthat was impossible. But I wish you had left word where you had
reallygone to. I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedymight be
followed by another. I think you might have telegraphed for mewhen you heard of
it first. I read of it quite by chance in a lateedition of _The Globe_ that I
picked up at the club. I came here atonce and was miserable at not finding you.
I can’t tell you howheart-broken I am about the whole thing. I know what you
must suffer.But where were you? Did you go down and see the girl’s mother? For
amoment I thought of following you there. They gave the address in thepaper.
Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn’t it? But I was afraid ofintruding upon a
sorrow that I could not lighten. Poor woman! What astate she must be in! And her
only child, too! What did she say aboutit all?”“My dear Basil, how do I know?”
murmured Dorian Gray, sipping somepale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded
bubble of Venetian glassand looking dreadfully bored. “I was at the opera. You
should have comeon there. I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry’s sister, for the first
time. Wewere in her box. She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang
divinely.Don’t talk about horrid subjects. If one doesn’t talk about a thing,
ithas never happened. It is simply expression, as Harry says, that givesreality
to things. I may mention that she was not the woman’s onlychild. There is a son,
a charming fellow, I believe. But he is not onthe stage. He is a sailor, or
something. And now, tell me aboutyourself and what you are painting.”“You went
to the opera?” said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with astrained touch of
pain in his voice. “You went to the opera while SibylVane was lying dead in some
sordid lodging? You can talk to me of otherwomen being charming, and of Patti
singing divinely, before the girlyou loved has even the quiet of a grave to
sleep in? Why, man, thereare horrors in store for that little white body of
hers!”“Stop, Basil! I won’t hear it!” cried Dorian, leaping to his feet.
“Youmust not tell me about things. What is done is done. What is past
ispast.”“You call yesterday the past?”“What has the actual lapse of time got to
do with it? It is onlyshallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion.
A man who ismaster of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent
apleasure. I don’t want to be at the mercy of my emotions. I want to usethem, to
enjoy them, and to dominate them.”“Dorian, this is horrible! Something has
changed you completely. Youlook exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after
day, used to comedown to my studio to sit for his picture. But you were simple,
natural,and affectionate then. You were the most unspoiled creature in thewhole
world. Now, I don’t know what has come over you. You talk as ifyou had no heart,
no pity in you. It is all Harry’s influence. I seethat.”The lad flushed up and,
going to the window, looked out for a fewmoments on the green, flickering,
sun-lashed garden. “I owe a greatdeal to Harry, Basil,” he said at last, “more
than I owe to you. Youonly taught me to be vain.”“Well, I am punished for that,
Dorian—or shall be some day.”“I don’t know what you mean, Basil,” he exclaimed,
turning round. “Idon’t know what you want. What do you want?”“I want the Dorian
Gray I used to paint,” said the artist sadly.“Basil,” said the lad, going over
to him and putting his hand on hisshoulder, “you have come too late. Yesterday,
when I heard that SibylVane had killed herself—”“Killed herself! Good heavens!
is there no doubt about that?” criedHallward, looking up at him with an
expression of horror.“My dear Basil! Surely you don’t think it was a vulgar
accident? Ofcourse she killed herself.”The elder man buried his face in his
hands. “How fearful,” he muttered,and a shudder ran through him.“No,” said
Dorian Gray, “there is nothing fearful about it. It is oneof the great romantic
tragedies of the age. As a rule, people who actlead the most commonplace lives.
They are good husbands, or faithfulwives, or something tedious. You know what I
mean—middle-class virtueand all that kind of thing. How different Sibyl was! She
lived herfinest tragedy. She was always a heroine. The last night she
played—thenight you saw her—she acted badly because she had known the reality
oflove. When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet might have died.She
passed again into the sphere of art. There is something of themartyr about her.
Her death has all the pathetic uselessness ofmartyrdom, all its wasted beauty.
But, as I was saying, you must notthink I have not suffered. If you had come in
yesterday at a particularmoment—about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to
six—you wouldhave found me in tears. Even Harry, who was here, who brought me
thenews, in fact, had no idea what I was going through. I sufferedimmensely.
Then it passed away. I cannot repeat an emotion. No one can,except
sentimentalists. And you are awfully unjust, Basil. You comedown here to console
me. That is charming of you. You find me consoled,and you are furious. How like
a sympathetic person! You remind me of astory Harry told me about a certain
philanthropist who spent twentyyears of his life in trying to get some grievance
redressed, or someunjust law altered—I forget exactly what it was. Finally he
succeeded,and nothing could exceed his disappointment. He had absolutely
nothingto do, almost died of _ennui_, and became a confirmed misanthrope.
Andbesides, my dear old Basil, if you really want to console me, teach merather
to forget what has happened, or to see it from a proper artisticpoint of view.
Was it not Gautier who used to write about _laconsolation des arts_? I remember
picking up a little vellum-coveredbook in your studio one day and chancing on
that delightful phrase.Well, I am not like that young man you told me of when we
were down atMarlow together, the young man who used to say that yellow satin
couldconsole one for all the miseries of life. I love beautiful things thatone
can touch and handle. Old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work,carved ivories,
exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp—there is much tobe got from all these. But
the artistic temperament that they create,or at any rate reveal, is still more
to me. To become the spectator ofone’s own life, as Harry says, is to escape the
suffering of life. Iknow you are surprised at my talking to you like this. You
have notrealized how I have developed. I was a schoolboy when you knew me. I ama
man now. I have new passions, new thoughts, new ideas. I amdifferent, but you
must not like me less. I am changed, but you mustalways be my friend. Of course,
I am very fond of Harry. But I knowthat you are better than he is. You are not
stronger—you are too muchafraid of life—but you are better. And how happy we
used to betogether! Don’t leave me, Basil, and don’t quarrel with me. I am what
Iam. There is nothing more to be said.”The painter felt strangely moved. The lad
was infinitely dear to him,and his personality had been the great turning point
in his art. Hecould not bear the idea of reproaching him any more. After all,
hisindifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away. There wasso
much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.“Well, Dorian,” he said
at length, with a sad smile, “I won’t speak toyou again about this horrible
thing, after to-day. I only trust yourname won’t be mentioned in connection with
it. The inquest is to takeplace this afternoon. Have they summoned you?”Dorian
shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face atthe mention of
the word “inquest.” There was something so crude andvulgar about everything of
the kind. “They don’t know my name,” heanswered.“But surely she did?”“Only my
Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentionedto any one. She told
me once that they were all rather curious to learnwho I was, and that she
invariably told them my name was PrinceCharming. It was pretty of her. You must
do me a drawing of Sibyl,Basil. I should like to have something more of her than
the memory of afew kisses and some broken pathetic words.”“I will try and do
something, Dorian, if it would please you. But youmust come and sit to me
yourself again. I can’t get on without you.”“I can never sit to you again,
Basil. It is impossible!” he exclaimed,starting back.The painter stared at him.
“My dear boy, what nonsense!” he cried. “Doyou mean to say you don’t like what I
did of you? Where is it? Why haveyou pulled the screen in front of it? Let me
look at it. It is the bestthing I have ever done. Do take the screen away,
Dorian. It is simplydisgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that. I felt
the roomlooked different as I came in.”“My servant has nothing to do with it,
Basil. You don’t imagine I lethim arrange my room for me? He settles my flowers
for me sometimes—thatis all. No; I did it myself. The light was too strong on
the portrait.”“Too strong! Surely not, my dear fellow? It is an admirable place
forit. Let me see it.” And Hallward walked towards the corner of the room.A cry
of terror broke from Dorian Gray’s lips, and he rushed betweenthe painter and
the screen. “Basil,” he said, looking very pale, “youmust not look at it. I
don’t wish you to.”“Not look at my own work! You are not serious. Why shouldn’t
I look atit?” exclaimed Hallward, laughing.“If you try to look at it, Basil, on
my word of honour I will neverspeak to you again as long as I live. I am quite
serious. I don’t offerany explanation, and you are not to ask for any. But,
remember, if youtouch this screen, everything is over between us.”Hallward was
thunderstruck. He looked at Dorian Gray in absoluteamazement. He had never seen
him like this before. The lad was actuallypallid with rage. His hands were
clenched, and the pupils of his eyeswere like disks of blue fire. He was
trembling all over.“Dorian!”“Don’t speak!”“But what is the matter? Of course I
won’t look at it if you don’t wantme to,” he said, rather coldly, turning on his
heel and going overtowards the window. “But, really, it seems rather absurd that
Ishouldn’t see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it inParis in
the autumn. I shall probably have to give it another coat ofvarnish before that,
so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?”“To exhibit it! You want to
exhibit it?” exclaimed Dorian Gray, astrange sense of terror creeping over him.
Was the world going to beshown his secret? Were people to gape at the mystery of
his life? Thatwas impossible. Something—he did not know what—had to be done at
once.“Yes; I don’t suppose you will object to that. Georges Petit is goingto
collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue deSèze, which
will open the first week in October. The portrait will onlybe away a month. I
should think you could easily spare it for thattime. In fact, you are sure to be
out of town. And if you keep italways behind a screen, you can’t care much about
it.”Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead. There were beads
ofperspiration there. He felt that he was on the brink of a horribledanger. “You
told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it,” hecried. “Why have you
changed your mind? You people who go in for beingconsistent have just as many
moods as others have. The only differenceis that your moods are rather
meaningless. You can’t have forgottenthat you assured me most solemnly that
nothing in the world wouldinduce you to send it to any exhibition. You told
Harry exactly thesame thing.” He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came
into hiseyes. He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, halfseriously
and half in jest, “If you want to have a strange quarter ofan hour, get Basil to
tell you why he won’t exhibit your picture. Hetold me why he wouldn’t, and it
was a revelation to me.” Yes, perhapsBasil, too, had his secret. He would ask
him and try.“Basil,” he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight
inthe face, “we have each of us a secret. Let me know yours, and I shalltell you
mine. What was your reason for refusing to exhibit mypicture?”The painter
shuddered in spite of himself. “Dorian, if I told you, youmight like me less
than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me. Icould not bear your doing
either of those two things. If you wish menever to look at your picture again, I
am content. I have always you tolook at. If you wish the best work I have ever
done to be hidden fromthe world, I am satisfied. Your friendship is dearer to me
than anyfame or reputation.”“No, Basil, you must tell me,” insisted Dorian Gray.
“I think I have aright to know.” His feeling of terror had passed away, and
curiosityhad taken its place. He was determined to find out Basil
Hallward’smystery.“Let us sit down, Dorian,” said the painter, looking troubled.
“Let ussit down. And just answer me one question. Have you noticed in thepicture
something curious?—something that probably at first did notstrike you, but that
revealed itself to you suddenly?”“Basil!” cried the lad, clutching the arms of
his chair with tremblinghands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.“I see
you did. Don’t speak. Wait till you hear what I have to say.Dorian, from the
moment I met you, your personality had the mostextraordinary influence over me.
I was dominated, soul, brain, andpower, by you. You became to me the visible
incarnation of that unseenideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite
dream. Iworshipped you. I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke. I
wantedto have you all to myself. I was only happy when I was with you. Whenyou
were away from me, you were still present in my art.... Of course,I never let
you know anything about this. It would have beenimpossible. You would not have
understood it. I hardly understood itmyself. I only knew that I had seen
perfection face to face, and thatthe world had become wonderful to my eyes—too
wonderful, perhaps, forin such mad worships there is peril, the peril of losing
them, no lessthan the peril of keeping them.... Weeks and weeks went on, and I
grewmore and more absorbed in you. Then came a new development. I had drawnyou
as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman’s cloak andpolished
boar-spear. Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat onthe prow of Adrian’s
barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile. Youhad leaned over the still pool of
some Greek woodland and seen in thewater’s silent silver the marvel of your own
face. And it had all beenwhat art should be—unconscious, ideal, and remote. One
day, a fatal dayI sometimes think, I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of
you asyou actually are, not in the costume of dead ages, but in your owndress
and in your own time. Whether it was the realism of the method,or the mere
wonder of your own personality, thus directly presented tome without mist or
veil, I cannot tell. But I know that as I worked atit, every flake and film of
colour seemed to me to reveal my secret. Igrew afraid that others would know of
my idolatry. I felt, Dorian, thatI had told too much, that I had put too much of
myself into it. Then itwas that I resolved never to allow the picture to be
exhibited. Youwere a little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it
meantto me. Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me. But I did notmind
that. When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, Ifelt that I was
right.... Well, after a few days the thing left mystudio, and as soon as I had
got rid of the intolerable fascination ofits presence, it seemed to me that I
had been foolish in imagining thatI had seen anything in it, more than that you
were extremelygood-looking and that I could paint. Even now I cannot help
feelingthat it is a mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation
isever really shown in the work one creates. Art is always more abstractthan we
fancy. Form and colour tell us of form and colour—that is all.It often seems to
me that art conceals the artist far more completelythan it ever reveals him. And
so when I got this offer from Paris, Idetermined to make your portrait the
principal thing in my exhibition.It never occurred to me that you would refuse.
I see now that you wereright. The picture cannot be shown. You must not be angry
with me,Dorian, for what I have told you. As I said to Harry, once, you aremade
to be worshipped.”Dorian Gray drew a long breath. The colour came back to his
cheeks, anda smile played about his lips. The peril was over. He was safe for
thetime. Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter whohad just
made this strange confession to him, and wondered if hehimself would ever be so
dominated by the personality of a friend. LordHenry had the charm of being very
dangerous. But that was all. He wastoo clever and too cynical to be really fond
of. Would there ever besome one who would fill him with a strange idolatry? Was
that one ofthe things that life had in store?“It is extraordinary to me,
Dorian,” said Hallward, “that you shouldhave seen this in the portrait. Did you
really see it?”“I saw something in it,” he answered, “something that seemed to
me verycurious.”“Well, you don’t mind my looking at the thing now?”Dorian shook
his head. “You must not ask me that, Basil. I could notpossibly let you stand in
front of that picture.”“You will some day, surely?”“Never.”“Well, perhaps you
are right. And now good-bye, Dorian. You have beenthe one person in my life who
has really influenced my art. Whatever Ihave done that is good, I owe to you.
Ah! you don’t know what it costme to tell you all that I have told you.”“My dear
Basil,” said Dorian, “what have you told me? Simply that youfelt that you
admired me too much. That is not even a compliment.”“It was not intended as a
compliment. It was a confession. Now that Ihave made it, something seems to have
gone out of me. Perhaps oneshould never put one’s worship into words.”“It was a
very disappointing confession.”“Why, what did you expect, Dorian? You didn’t see
anything else in thepicture, did you? There was nothing else to see?”“No; there
was nothing else to see. Why do you ask? But you mustn’ttalk about worship. It
is foolish. You and I are friends, Basil, and wemust always remain so.”“You have
got Harry,” said the painter sadly.“Oh, Harry!” cried the lad, with a ripple of
laughter. “Harry spendshis days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in
doing what isimprobable. Just the sort of life I would like to lead. But still
Idon’t think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble. I would sooner goto you,
Basil.”“You will sit to me again?”“Impossible!”“You spoil my life as an artist
by refusing, Dorian. No man comesacross two ideal things. Few come across
one.”“I can’t explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again.There
is something fatal about a portrait. It has a life of its own. Iwill come and
have tea with you. That will be just as pleasant.”“Pleasanter for you, I am
afraid,” murmured Hallward regretfully. “Andnow good-bye. I am sorry you won’t
let me look at the picture onceagain. But that can’t be helped. I quite
understand what you feel aboutit.”As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to
himself. Poor Basil! Howlittle he knew of the true reason! And how strange it
was that, insteadof having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had
succeeded,almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend! How much
thatstrange confession explained to him! The painter’s absurd fits ofjealousy,
his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curiousreticences—he
understood them all now, and he felt sorry. There seemedto him to be something
tragic in a friendship so coloured by romance.He sighed and touched the bell.
The portrait must be hidden away at allcosts. He could not run such a risk of
discovery again. It had been madof him to have allowed the thing to remain, even
for an hour, in a roomto which any of his friends had access.CHAPTER X.When his
servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered ifhe had thought of
peering behind the screen. The man was quiteimpassive and waited for his orders.
Dorian lit a cigarette and walkedover to the glass and glanced into it. He could
see the reflection ofVictor’s face perfectly. It was like a placid mask of
servility. Therewas nothing to be afraid of, there. Yet he thought it best to be
on hisguard.Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that
hewanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him tosend two of
his men round at once. It seemed to him that as the manleft the room his eyes
wandered in the direction of the screen. Or wasthat merely his own fancy?After a
few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned threadmittens on her
wrinkled hands, Mrs. Leaf bustled into the library. Heasked her for the key of
the schoolroom.“The old schoolroom, Mr. Dorian?” she exclaimed. “Why, it is full
ofdust. I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it. Itis not
fit for you to see, sir. It is not, indeed.”“I don’t want it put straight, Leaf.
I only want the key.”“Well, sir, you’ll be covered with cobwebs if you go into
it. Why, ithasn’t been opened for nearly five years—not since his lordship
died.”He winced at the mention of his grandfather. He had hateful memories
ofhim. “That does not matter,” he answered. “I simply want to see theplace—that
is all. Give me the key.”“And here is the key, sir,” said the old lady, going
over the contentsof her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands. “Here is the
key. I’llhave it off the bunch in a moment. But you don’t think of living
upthere, sir, and you so comfortable here?”“No, no,” he cried petulantly. “Thank
you, Leaf. That will do.”She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over
some detail ofthe household. He sighed and told her to manage things as she
thoughtbest. She left the room, wreathed in smiles.As the door closed, Dorian
put the key in his pocket and looked roundthe room. His eye fell on a large,
purple satin coverlet heavilyembroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late
seventeenth-centuryVenetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent
near Bologna.Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. It had
perhapsserved often as a pall for the dead. Now it was to hide something thathad
a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of deathitself—something that
would breed horrors and yet would never die. Whatthe worm was to the corpse, his
sins would be to the painted image onthe canvas. They would mar its beauty and
eat away its grace. Theywould defile it and make it shameful. And yet the thing
would stilllive on. It would be always alive.He shuddered, and for a moment he
regretted that he had not told Basilthe true reason why he had wished to hide
the picture away. Basil wouldhave helped him to resist Lord Henry’s influence,
and the still morepoisonous influences that came from his own temperament. The
love thathe bore him—for it was really love—had nothing in it that was not
nobleand intellectual. It was not that mere physical admiration of beautythat is
born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire. It wassuch love as
Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann,and Shakespeare himself.
Yes, Basil could have saved him. But it wastoo late now. The past could always
be annihilated. Regret, denial, orforgetfulness could do that. But the future
was inevitable. There werepassions in him that would find their terrible outlet,
dreams thatwould make the shadow of their evil real.He took up from the couch
the great purple-and-gold texture thatcovered it, and, holding it in his hands,
passed behind the screen. Wasthe face on the canvas viler than before? It seemed
to him that it wasunchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified. Gold
hair, blueeyes, and rose-red lips—they all were there. It was simply
theexpression that had altered. That was horrible in its cruelty. Comparedto
what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil’sreproaches about
Sibyl Vane had been!—how shallow, and of what littleaccount! His own soul was
looking out at him from the canvas andcalling him to judgement. A look of pain
came across him, and he flungthe rich pall over the picture. As he did so, a
knock came to the door.He passed out as his servant entered.“The persons are
here, Monsieur.”He felt that the man must be got rid of at once. He must not be
allowedto know where the picture was being taken to. There was something
slyabout him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes. Sitting down at
thewriting-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send himround
something to read and reminding him that they were to meet ateight-fifteen that
evening.“Wait for an answer,” he said, handing it to him, “and show the men
inhere.”In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbardhimself,
the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came inwith a somewhat
rough-looking young assistant. Mr. Hubbard was aflorid, red-whiskered little
man, whose admiration for art wasconsiderably tempered by the inveterate
impecuniosity of most of theartists who dealt with him. As a rule, he never left
his shop. Hewaited for people to come to him. But he always made an exception
infavour of Dorian Gray. There was something about Dorian that charmedeverybody.
It was a pleasure even to see him.“What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?” he said,
rubbing his fat freckledhands. “I thought I would do myself the honour of coming
round inperson. I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir. Picked it up at asale.
Old Florentine. Came from Fonthill, I believe. Admirably suitedfor a religious
subject, Mr. Gray.”“I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming
round, Mr.Hubbard. I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame—though I
don’tgo in much at present for religious art—but to-day I only want apicture
carried to the top of the house for me. It is rather heavy, soI thought I would
ask you to lend me a couple of your men.”“No trouble at all, Mr. Gray. I am
delighted to be of any service toyou. Which is the work of art, sir?”“This,”
replied Dorian, moving the screen back. “Can you move it,covering and all, just
as it is? I don’t want it to get scratched goingupstairs.”“There will be no
difficulty, sir,” said the genial frame-maker,beginning, with the aid of his
assistant, to unhook the picture fromthe long brass chains by which it was
suspended. “And, now, where shallwe carry it to, Mr. Gray?”“I will show you the
way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me. Orperhaps you had better go in
front. I am afraid it is right at the topof the house. We will go up by the
front staircase, as it is wider.”He held the door open for them, and they passed
out into the hall andbegan the ascent. The elaborate character of the frame had
made thepicture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the
obsequiousprotests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman’s spirited
dislikeof seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to itso
as to help them.“Something of a load to carry, sir,” gasped the little man when
theyreached the top landing. And he wiped his shiny forehead.“I am afraid it is
rather heavy,” murmured Dorian as he unlocked thedoor that opened into the room
that was to keep for him the curioussecret of his life and hide his soul from
the eyes of men.He had not entered the place for more than four years—not,
indeed,since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and thenas
a study when he grew somewhat older. It was a large,well-proportioned room,
which had been specially built by the last LordKelso for the use of the little
grandson whom, for his strange likenessto his mother, and also for other
reasons, he had always hated anddesired to keep at a distance. It appeared to
Dorian to have but littlechanged. There was the huge Italian _cassone_, with its
fantasticallypainted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which he had
sooften hidden himself as a boy. There the satinwood book-case filledwith his
dog-eared schoolbooks. On the wall behind it was hanging thesame ragged Flemish
tapestry where a faded king and queen were playingchess in a garden, while a
company of hawkers rode by, carrying hoodedbirds on their gauntleted wrists. How
well he remembered it all! Everymoment of his lonely childhood came back to him
as he looked round. Herecalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it
seemedhorrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hiddenaway.
How little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was instore for
him!But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes asthis.
He had the key, and no one else could enter it. Beneath itspurple pall, the face
painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden,and unclean. What did it
matter? No one could see it. He himself wouldnot see it. Why should he watch the
hideous corruption of his soul? Hekept his youth—that was enough. And, besides,
might not his nature growfiner, after all? There was no reason that the future
should be so fullof shame. Some love might come across his life, and purify him,
andshield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spiritand in
flesh—those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent themtheir subtlety
and their charm. Perhaps, some day, the cruel look wouldhave passed away from
the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show tothe world Basil Hallward’s
masterpiece.No; that was impossible. Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing
uponthe canvas was growing old. It might escape the hideousness of sin, butthe
hideousness of age was in store for it. The cheeks would becomehollow or
flaccid. Yellow crow’s feet would creep round the fading eyesand make them
horrible. The hair would lose its brightness, the mouthwould gape or droop,
would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of oldmen are. There would be the
wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veinedhands, the twisted body, that he
remembered in the grandfather who hadbeen so stern to him in his boyhood. The
picture had to be concealed.There was no help for it.“Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard,
please,” he said, wearily, turning round. “Iam sorry I kept you so long. I was
thinking of something else.”“Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Gray,” answered the
frame-maker, whowas still gasping for breath. “Where shall we put it, sir?”“Oh,
anywhere. Here: this will do. I don’t want to have it hung up.Just lean it
against the wall. Thanks.”“Might one look at the work of art, sir?”Dorian
started. “It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard,” he said,keeping his eye on
the man. He felt ready to leap upon him and flinghim to the ground if he dared
to lift the gorgeous hanging thatconcealed the secret of his life. “I shan’t
trouble you any more now. Iam much obliged for your kindness in coming
round.”“Not at all, not at all, Mr. Gray. Ever ready to do anything for
you,sir.” And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant,who
glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his roughuncomely face. He
had never seen any one so marvellous.When the sound of their footsteps had died
away, Dorian locked the doorand put the key in his pocket. He felt safe now. No
one would ever lookupon the horrible thing. No eye but his would ever see his
shame.On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o’clockand
that the tea had been already brought up. On a little table of darkperfumed wood
thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady Radley,his guardian’s wife, a
pretty professional invalid who had spent thepreceding winter in Cairo, was
lying a note from Lord Henry, and besideit was a book bound in yellow paper, the
cover slightly torn and theedges soiled. A copy of the third edition of _The St.
James’s Gazette_had been placed on the tea-tray. It was evident that Victor
hadreturned. He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they wereleaving
the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.He would be sure
to miss the picture—had no doubt missed it already,while he had been laying the
tea-things. The screen had not been setback, and a blank space was visible on
the wall. Perhaps some night hemight find him creeping upstairs and trying to
force the door of theroom. It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one’s house.
He hadheard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by someservant
who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or pickedup a card with an
address, or found beneath a pillow a withered floweror a shred of crumpled
lace.He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry’snote.
It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper,and a book that
might interest him, and that he would be at the club ateight-fifteen. He opened
_The St. James’s_ languidly, and lookedthrough it. A red pencil-mark on the
fifth page caught his eye. It drewattention to the following paragraph:INQUEST
ON AN ACTRESS.—An inquest was held this morning at the BellTavern, Hoxton Road,
by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body ofSibyl Vane, a young actress
recently engaged at the Royal Theatre,Holborn. A verdict of death by
misadventure was returned. Considerablesympathy was expressed for the mother of
the deceased, who was greatlyaffected during the giving of her own evidence, and
that of Dr.Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.He
frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room andflung the pieces
away. How ugly it all was! And how horribly realugliness made things! He felt a
little annoyed with Lord Henry forhaving sent him the report. And it was
certainly stupid of him to havemarked it with red pencil. Victor might have read
it. The man knew morethan enough English for that.Perhaps he had read it and had
begun to suspect something. And, yet,what did it matter? What had Dorian Gray to
do with Sibyl Vane’s death?There was nothing to fear. Dorian Gray had not killed
her.His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him. What wasit, he
wondered. He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonalstand that had
always looked to him like the work of some strangeEgyptian bees that wrought in
silver, and taking up the volume, flunghimself into an arm-chair and began to
turn over the leaves. After afew minutes he became absorbed. It was the
strangest book that he hadever read. It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment,
and to thedelicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in
dumbshow before him. Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly madereal
to him. Things of which he had never dreamed were graduallyrevealed.It was a
novel without a plot and with only one character, being,indeed, simply a
psychological study of a certain young Parisian whospent his life trying to
realize in the nineteenth century all thepassions and modes of thought that
belonged to every century except hisown, and to sum up, as it were, in himself
the various moods throughwhich the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for
their mereartificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called
virtue,as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin.
Thestyle in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vividand
obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technicalexpressions and
of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the workof some of the finest
artists of the French school of _Symbolistes_.There were in it metaphors as
monstrous as orchids and as subtle incolour. The life of the senses was
described in the terms of mysticalphilosophy. One hardly knew at times whether
one was reading thespiritual ecstasies of some mediæval saint or the morbid
confessions ofa modern sinner. It was a poisonous book. The heavy odour of
incenseseemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain. The merecadence
of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so fullas it was of
complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated,produced in the mind of the
lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter,a form of reverie, a malady of
dreaming, that made him unconscious ofthe falling day and creeping
shadows.Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky
gleamedthrough the windows. He read on by its wan light till he could read
nomore. Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of thelateness of
the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placedthe book on the little
Florentine table that always stood at hisbedside and began to dress for
dinner.It was almost nine o’clock before he reached the club, where he foundLord
Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.“I am so
sorry, Harry,” he cried, “but really it is entirely yourfault. That book you
sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how thetime was going.”“Yes, I thought
you would like it,” replied his host, rising from hischair.“I didn’t say I liked
it, Harry. I said it fascinated me. There is agreat difference.”“Ah, you have
discovered that?” murmured Lord Henry. And they passedinto the
dining-room.CHAPTER XI.For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the
influence ofthis book. Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he
neversought to free himself from it. He procured from Paris no less thannine
large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound indifferent colours,
so that they might suit his various moods and thechanging fancies of a nature
over which he seemed, at times, to havealmost entirely lost control. The hero,
the wonderful young Parisian inwhom the romantic and the scientific temperaments
were so strangelyblended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.
And,indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his ownlife,
written before he had lived it.In one point he was more fortunate than the
novel’s fantastic hero. Henever knew—never, indeed, had any cause to know—that
somewhat grotesquedread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still water
whichcame upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was occasionedby the
sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently, been soremarkable. It was with
an almost cruel joy—and perhaps in nearly everyjoy, as certainly in every
pleasure, cruelty has its place—that he usedto read the latter part of the book,
with its really tragic, ifsomewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and
despair of one whohad himself lost what in others, and the world, he had most
dearlyvalued.For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward,
andmany others besides him, seemed never to leave him. Even those who hadheard
the most evil things against him—and from time to time strangerumours about his
mode of life crept through London and became thechatter of the clubs—could not
believe anything to his dishonour whenthey saw him. He had always the look of
one who had kept himselfunspotted from the world. Men who talked grossly became
silent whenDorian Gray entered the room. There was something in the purity of
hisface that rebuked them. His mere presence seemed to recall to them thememory
of the innocence that they had tarnished. They wondered how oneso charming and
graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of anage that was at once sordid
and sensual.Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and
prolongedabsences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who
werehis friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creepupstairs to
the locked room, open the door with the key that never lefthim now, and stand,
with a mirror, in front of the portrait that BasilHallward had painted of him,
looking now at the evil and aging face onthe canvas, and now at the fair young
face that laughed back at himfrom the polished glass. The very sharpness of the
contrast used toquicken his sense of pleasure. He grew more and more enamoured
of hisown beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.He
would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous andterrible
delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling foreheador crawled around
the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes whichwere the more horrible, the
signs of sin or the signs of age. He wouldplace his white hands beside the
coarse bloated hands of the picture,and smile. He mocked the misshapen body and
the failing limbs.There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in
his owndelicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the littleill-famed
tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and indisguise, it was his
habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin hehad brought upon his soul with a
pity that was all the more poignantbecause it was purely selfish. But moments
such as these were rare.That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first
stirred in him, asthey sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to
increasewith gratification. The more he knew, the more he desired to know. Hehad
mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.Yet he was not really
reckless, at any rate in his relations tosociety. Once or twice every month
during the winter, and on eachWednesday evening while the season lasted, he
would throw open to theworld his beautiful house and have the most celebrated
musicians of theday to charm his guests with the wonders of their art. His
littledinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him,
werenoted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited,as for
the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, withits subtle
symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroideredcloths, and antique
plate of gold and silver. Indeed, there were many,especially among the very
young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw,in Dorian Gray the true realization
of a type of which they had oftendreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was
to combine something ofthe real culture of the scholar with all the grace and
distinction andperfect manner of a citizen of the world. To them he seemed to be
ofthe company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to “makethemselves
perfect by the worship of beauty.” Like Gautier, he was onefor whom “the visible
world existed.”And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest,
of thearts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a
preparation.Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a
momentuniversal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assertthe
absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination forhim. His mode
of dressing, and the particular styles that from time totime he affected, had
their marked influence on the young exquisites ofthe Mayfair balls and Pall Mall
club windows, who copied him ineverything that he did, and tried to reproduce
the accidental charm ofhis graceful, though to him only half-serious,
fopperies.For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was
almostimmediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed,
asubtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to theLondon of his
own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of theSatyricon once had been,
yet in his inmost heart he desired to besomething more than a mere _arbiter
elegantiarum_, to be consulted onthe wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a
necktie, or the conduct ofa cane. He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life
that would haveits reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in
thespiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.The worship of the
senses has often, and with much justice, beendecried, men feeling a natural
instinct of terror about passions andsensations that seem stronger than
themselves, and that they areconscious of sharing with the less highly organized
forms of existence.But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the
senses hadnever been understood, and that they had remained savage and
animalmerely because the world had sought to starve them into submission orto
kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of anew
spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be thedominant
characteristic. As he looked back upon man moving throughhistory, he was haunted
by a feeling of loss. So much had beensurrendered! and to such little purpose!
There had been mad wilfulrejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and
self-denial, whoseorigin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely
moreterrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance,they
had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving outthe anchorite
to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving tothe hermit the beasts
of the field as his companions.Yes: there was to be, as Lord Henry had
prophesied, a new Hedonism thatwas to recreate life and to save it from that
harsh uncomely puritanismthat is having, in our own day, its curious revival. It
was to have itsservice of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to accept
anytheory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any mode ofpassionate
experience. Its aim, indeed, was to be experience itself,and not the fruits of
experience, sweet or bitter as they might be. Ofthe asceticism that deadens the
senses, as of the vulgar profligacythat dulls them, it was to know nothing. But
it was to teach man toconcentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is
itself but amoment.There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before
dawn, eitherafter one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured
ofdeath, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when throughthe
chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than realityitself, and
instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques,and that lends to
Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, onemight fancy, especially the
art of those whose minds have been troubledwith the malady of reverie. Gradually
white fingers creep through thecurtains, and they appear to tremble. In black
fantastic shapes, dumbshadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch
there. Outside,there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of
mengoing forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming downfrom
the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though itfeared to wake the
sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep fromher purple cave. Veil after
veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and bydegrees the forms and colours of
things are restored to them, and wewatch the dawn remaking the world in its
antique pattern. The wanmirrors get back their mimic life. The flameless tapers
stand where wehad left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had
beenstudying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or theletter
that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.Nothing seems to
us changed. Out of the unreal shadows of the nightcomes back the real life that
we had known. We have to resume it wherewe had left off, and there steals over
us a terrible sense of thenecessity for the continuance of energy in the same
wearisome round ofstereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our
eyelidsmight open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew inthe
darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have freshshapes and
colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world inwhich the past would
have little or no place, or survive, at any rate,in no conscious form of
obligation or regret, the remembrance even ofjoy having its bitterness and the
memories of pleasure their pain.It was the creation of such worlds as these that
seemed to Dorian Grayto be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of
life; and in hissearch for sensations that would be at once new and delightful,
andpossess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, hewould
often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be reallyalien to his
nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, andthen, having, as it were,
caught their colour and satisfied hisintellectual curiosity, leave them with
that curious indifference thatis not incompatible with a real ardour of
temperament, and that,indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is
often a conditionof it.It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the
RomanCatholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a
greatattraction for him. The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all
thesacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superbrejection
of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicityof its elements and
the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that itsought to symbolize. He loved to
kneel down on the cold marble pavementand watch the priest, in his stiff
flowered dalmatic, slowly and withwhite hands moving aside the veil of the
tabernacle, or raising aloftthe jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that
pallid wafer that attimes, one would fain think, is indeed the “_panis
cælestis_,” thebread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the Passion of
Christ,breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his breast for his
sins.The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet,tossed
into the air like great gilt flowers had their subtlefascination for him. As he
passed out, he used to look with wonder atthe black confessionals and long to
sit in the dim shadow of one ofthem and listen to men and women whispering
through the worn gratingthe true story of their lives.But he never fell into the
error of arresting his intellectualdevelopment by any formal acceptance of creed
or system, or ofmistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but
suitablefor the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in whichthere
are no stars and the moon is in travail. Mysticism, with itsmarvellous power of
making common things strange to us, and the subtleantinomianism that always
seems to accompany it, moved him for aseason; and for a season he inclined to
the materialistic doctrines ofthe _Darwinismus_ movement in Germany, and found a
curious pleasure intracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell
in thebrain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception ofthe
absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions,morbid or
healthy, normal or diseased. Yet, as has been said of himbefore, no theory of
life seemed to him to be of any importancecompared with life itself. He felt
keenly conscious of how barren allintellectual speculation is when separated
from action and experiment.He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have
their spiritualmysteries to reveal.And so he would now study perfumes and the
secrets of theirmanufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous
gumsfrom the East. He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had notits
counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover theirtrue
relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made onemystical, and
in ambergris that stirred one’s passions, and in violetsthat woke the memory of
dead romances, and in musk that troubled thebrain, and in champak that stained
the imagination; and seeking oftento elaborate a real psychology of perfumes,
and to estimate the severalinfluences of sweet-smelling roots and scented,
pollen-laden flowers;of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of
spikenard, thatsickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are
said tobe able to expel melancholy from the soul.At another time he devoted
himself entirely to music, and in a longlatticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold
ceiling and walls ofolive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in
which madgipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave,
yellow-shawledTunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes,
whilegrinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouchingupon
scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes ofreed or brass and
charmed—or feigned to charm—great hooded snakes andhorrible horned adders. The
harsh intervals and shrill discords ofbarbaric music stirred him at times when
Schubert’s grace, and Chopin’sbeautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of
Beethoven himself, fellunheeded on his ear. He collected together from all parts
of the worldthe strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs
ofdead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contactwith
Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them. He had themysterious
_juruparis_ of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are notallowed to look at and
that even youths may not see till they have beensubjected to fasting and
scourging, and the earthen jars of thePeruvians that have the shrill cries of
birds, and flutes of humanbones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and
the sonorous greenjaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of
singularsweetness. He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled
whenthey were shaken; the long _clarin_ of the Mexicans, into which theperformer
does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; theharsh _ture_ of the
Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels whosit all day long in high
trees, and can be heard, it is said, at adistance of three leagues; the
_teponaztli_, that has two vibratingtongues of wood and is beaten with sticks
that are smeared with anelastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the
_yotl_-bellsof the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a
hugecylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like theone that
Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexicantemple, and of whose
doleful sound he has left us so vivid adescription. The fantastic character of
these instruments fascinatedhim, and he felt a curious delight in the thought
that art, likeNature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with
hideousvoices. Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in hisbox
at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in raptpleasure to
“Tannhauser” and seeing in the prelude to that great workof art a presentation
of the tragedy of his own soul.On one occasion he took up the study of jewels,
and appeared at acostume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress
coveredwith five hundred and sixty pearls. This taste enthralled him foryears,
and, indeed, may be said never to have left him. He would oftenspend a whole day
settling and resettling in their cases the variousstones that he had collected,
such as the olive-green chrysoberyl thatturns red by lamplight, the cymophane
with its wirelike line of silver,the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and
wine-yellow topazes,carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed
stars, flame-redcinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with
theiralternate layers of ruby and sapphire. He loved the red gold of
thesunstone, and the moonstone’s pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbowof the
milky opal. He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds ofextraordinary size and
richness of colour, and had a turquoise _de lavieille roche_ that was the envy
of all the connoisseurs.He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels. In
Alphonso’sClericalis Disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of
realjacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander, the Conqueror ofEmathia
was said to have found in the vale of Jordan snakes “withcollars of real
emeralds growing on their backs.” There was a gem inthe brain of the dragon,
Philostratus told us, and “by the exhibitionof golden letters and a scarlet
robe” the monster could be thrown intoa magical sleep and slain. According to
the great alchemist, Pierre deBoniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible,
and the agate of Indiamade him eloquent. The cornelian appeased anger, and the
hyacinthprovoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine. Thegarnet
cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of hercolour. The selenite
waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus,that discovers thieves, could be
affected only by the blood of kids.Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone
taken from the brain of anewly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against
poison. Thebezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a
charmthat could cure the plague. In the nests of Arabian birds was theaspilates,
that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from anydanger by fire.The King
of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand,as the ceremony of
his coronation. The gates of the palace of John thePriest were “made of sardius,
with the horn of the horned snakeinwrought, so that no man might bring poison
within.” Over the gablewere “two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles,”
so that thegold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night. In Lodge’s
strangeromance ‘A Margarite of America’, it was stated that in the chamber ofthe
queen one could behold “all the chaste ladies of the world,inchased out of
silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrysolites,carbuncles, sapphires, and
greene emeraults.” Marco Polo had seen theinhabitants of Zipangu place
rose-coloured pearls in the mouths of thedead. A sea-monster had been enamoured
of the pearl that the diverbrought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and
mourned for sevenmoons over its loss. When the Huns lured the king into the
great pit,he flung it away—Procopius tells the story—nor was it ever found
again,though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of goldpieces
for it. The King of Malabar had shown to a certain Venetian arosary of three
hundred and four pearls, one for every god that heworshipped.When the Duke de
Valentinois, son of Alexander VI., visited Louis XII.of France, his horse was
loaded with gold leaves, according toBrantome, and his cap had double rows of
rubies that threw out a greatlight. Charles of England had ridden in stirrups
hung with four hundredand twenty-one diamonds. Richard II had a coat, valued at
thirtythousand marks, which was covered with balas rubies. Hall describedHenry
VIII., on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, aswearing “a jacket
of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamondsand other rich stones, and
a great bauderike about his neck of largebalasses.” The favourites of James I
wore ear-rings of emeralds set ingold filigrane. Edward II gave to Piers
Gaveston a suit of red-goldarmour studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses
set withturquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parsemé_ with pearls. Henry II.
worejewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn withtwelve
rubies and fifty-two great orients. The ducal hat of Charles theRash, the last
Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shapedpearls and studded with
sapphires.How exquisite life had once been! How gorgeous in its pomp
anddecoration! Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.Then he
turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries thatperformed the
office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northernnations of Europe. As he
investigated the subject—and he always had anextraordinary faculty of becoming
absolutely absorbed for the moment inwhatever he took up—he was almost saddened
by the reflection of theruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful
things. He, at anyrate, had escaped that. Summer followed summer, and the yellow
jonquilsbloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the story
oftheir shame, but he was unchanged. No winter marred his face or stainedhis
flowerlike bloom. How different it was with material things! Wherehad they
passed to? Where was the great crocus-coloured robe, on whichthe gods fought
against the giants, that had been worked by brown girlsfor the pleasure of
Athena? Where the huge velarium that Nero hadstretched across the Colosseum at
Rome, that Titan sail of purple onwhich was represented the starry sky, and
Apollo driving a chariotdrawn by white, gilt-reined steeds? He longed to see the
curioustable-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which weredisplayed
all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast;the mortuary cloth
of King Chilperic, with its three hundred goldenbees; the fantastic robes that
excited the indignation of the Bishop ofPontus and were figured with “lions,
panthers, bears, dogs, forests,rocks, hunters—all, in fact, that a painter can
copy from nature”; andthe coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves
of whichwere embroidered the verses of a song beginning “_Madame, je suis
toutjoyeux_,” the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in
goldthread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with
fourpearls. He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheimsfor the
use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with “thirteenhundred and
twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with theking’s arms, and five
hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wingswere similarly ornamented with the
arms of the queen, the whole workedin gold.” Catherine de Medicis had a
mourning-bed made for her of blackvelvet powdered with crescents and suns. Its
curtains were of damask,with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and
silver ground,and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it
stood ina room hung with rows of the queen’s devices in cut black velvet
uponcloth of silver. Louis XIV. had gold embroidered caryatides fifteenfeet high
in his apartment. The state bed of Sobieski, King of Poland,was made of Smyrna
gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with versesfrom the Koran. Its supports
were of silver gilt, beautifully chased,and profusely set with enamelled and
jewelled medallions. It had beentaken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and
the standard of Mohammedhad stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.And
so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisitespecimens that
he could find of textile and embroidered work, gettingthe dainty Delhi muslins,
finely wrought with gold-thread palmates andstitched over with iridescent
beetles’ wings; the Dacca gauzes, thatfrom their transparency are known in the
East as “woven air,” and“running water,” and “evening dew”; strange figured
cloths from Java;elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins
or fairblue silks and wrought with _fleurs-de-lis_, birds and images; veils
of_lacis_ worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanishvelvets;
Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese _Foukousas_,with their
green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.He had a special
passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeedhe had for everything
connected with the service of the Church. In thelong cedar chests that lined the
west gallery of his house, he hadstored away many rare and beautiful specimens
of what is really theraiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and
jewels andfine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn
bythe suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain.
Hepossessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask,figured with
a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set insix-petalled formal blossoms,
beyond which on either side was thepine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls. The
orphreys were dividedinto panels representing scenes from the life of the
Virgin, and thecoronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the
hood.This was Italian work of the fifteenth century. Another cope was ofgreen
velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves,from which
spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of whichwere picked out with
silver thread and coloured crystals. The morsebore a seraph’s head in
gold-thread raised work. The orphreys werewoven in a diaper of red and gold
silk, and were starred withmedallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was
St. Sebastian. Hehad chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and
goldbrocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured
withrepresentations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, andembroidered
with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics ofwhite satin and pink silk
damask, decorated with tulips and dolphinsand _fleurs-de-lis_; altar frontals of
crimson velvet and blue linen;and many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria. In
the mystic officesto which such things were put, there was something that
quickened hisimagination.For these treasures, and everything that he collected
in his lovelyhouse, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which
hecould escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at timesto be
almost too great to be borne. Upon the walls of the lonely lockedroom where he
had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with hisown hands the terrible
portrait whose changing features showed him thereal degradation of his life, and
in front of it had draped thepurple-and-gold pall as a curtain. For weeks he
would not go there,would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his
light heart,his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere
existence.Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down
todreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day,until he
was driven away. On his return he would sit in front of thepicture, sometimes
loathing it and himself, but filled, at other times,with that pride of
individualism that is half the fascination of sin,and smiling with secret
pleasure at the misshapen shadow that had tobear the burden that should have
been his own.After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England,
andgave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, aswell as
the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had morethan once spent
the winter. He hated to be separated from the picturethat was such a part of his
life, and was also afraid that during hisabsence some one might gain access to
the room, in spite of theelaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the
door.He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing. It was truethat
the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and uglinessof the face,
its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learnfrom that? He would
laugh at any one who tried to taunt him. He had notpainted it. What was it to
him how vile and full of shame it looked?Even if he told them, would they
believe it?Yet he was afraid. Sometimes when he was down at his great house
inNottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rankwho
were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wantonluxury and
gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenlyleave his guests and
rush back to town to see that the door had notbeen tampered with and that the
picture was still there. What if itshould be stolen? The mere thought made him
cold with horror. Surelythe world would know his secret then. Perhaps the world
alreadysuspected it.For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who
distrusted him.He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his
birthand social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it wassaid
that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into thesmoking-room of
the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and anothergentleman got up in a marked
manner and went out. Curious storiesbecame current about him after he had passed
his twenty-fifth year. Itwas rumoured that he had been seen brawling with
foreign sailors in alow den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he
consorted withthieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade.
Hisextraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappearagain
in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or passhim with a sneer,
or look at him with cold searching eyes, as thoughthey were determined to
discover his secret.Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took
no notice,and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner,
hischarming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youththat
seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answerto the
calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated abouthim. It was
remarked, however, that some of those who had been mostintimate with him
appeared, after a time, to shun him. Women who hadwildly adored him, and for his
sake had braved all social censure andset convention at defiance, were seen to
grow pallid with shame orhorror if Dorian Gray entered the room.Yet these
whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many hisstrange and dangerous
charm. His great wealth was a certain element ofsecurity. Society—civilized
society, at least—is never very ready tobelieve anything to the detriment of
those who are both rich andfascinating. It feels instinctively that manners are
of more importancethan morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability
is of muchless value than the possession of a good _chef_. And, after all, it
isa very poor consolation to be told that the man who has given one a baddinner,
or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life. Even thecardinal virtues
cannot atone for half-cold _entrées_, as Lord Henryremarked once, in a
discussion on the subject, and there is possibly agood deal to be said for his
view. For the canons of good society are,or should be, the same as the canons of
art. Form is absolutelyessential to it. It should have the dignity of a
ceremony, as well asits unreality, and should combine the insincere character of
a romanticplay with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us.
Isinsincerity such a terrible thing? I think not. It is merely a methodby which
we can multiply our personalities.Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray’s opinion.
He used to wonder at theshallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man
as a thingsimple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence. To him, man was
abeing with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiformcreature that
bore within itself strange legacies of thought andpassion, and whose very flesh
was tainted with the monstrous maladiesof the dead. He loved to stroll through
the gaunt cold picture-galleryof his country house and look at the various
portraits of those whoseblood flowed in his veins. Here was Philip Herbert,
described byFrancis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth
andKing James, as one who was “caressed by the Court for his handsomeface, which
kept him not long company.” Was it young Herbert’s lifethat he sometimes led?
Had some strange poisonous germ crept from bodyto body till it had reached his
own? Was it some dim sense of thatruined grace that had made him so suddenly,
and almost without cause,give utterance, in Basil Hallward’s studio, to the mad
prayer that hadso changed his life? Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet,
jewelledsurcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood Sir Anthony
Sherard,with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet. What had this
man’slegacy been? Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him
someinheritance of sin and shame? Were his own actions merely the dreamsthat the
dead man had not dared to realize? Here, from the fadingcanvas, smiled Lady
Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearlstomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.
A flower was in her right hand,and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white
and damask roses. Ona table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple. There were
large greenrosettes upon her little pointed shoes. He knew her life, and
thestrange stories that were told about her lovers. Had he something ofher
temperament in him? These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to lookcuriously at
him. What of George Willoughby, with his powdered hair andfantastic patches? How
evil he looked! The face was saturnine andswarthy, and the sensual lips seemed
to be twisted with disdain.Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands
that were sooverladen with rings. He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth
century,and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars. What of the second
LordBeckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his wildest days, andone of
the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs. Fitzherbert? Howproud and
handsome he was, with his chestnut curls and insolent pose!What passions had he
bequeathed? The world had looked upon him asinfamous. He had led the orgies at
Carlton House. The star of theGarter glittered upon his breast. Beside him hung
the portrait of hiswife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black. Her blood, also,
stirredwithin him. How curious it all seemed! And his mother with her
LadyHamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips—he knew what he had gotfrom
her. He had got from her his beauty, and his passion for thebeauty of others.
She laughed at him in her loose Bacchante dress.There were vine leaves in her
hair. The purple spilled from the cup shewas holding. The carnations of the
painting had withered, but the eyeswere still wonderful in their depth and
brilliancy of colour. Theyseemed to follow him wherever he went.Yet one had
ancestors in literature as well as in one’s own race,nearer perhaps in type and
temperament, many of them, and certainlywith an influence of which one was more
absolutely conscious. Therewere times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the
whole of historywas merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in
actand circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as ithad
been in his brain and in his passions. He felt that he had knownthem all, those
strange terrible figures that had passed across thestage of the world and made
sin so marvellous and evil so full ofsubtlety. It seemed to him that in some
mysterious way their lives hadbeen his own.The hero of the wonderful novel that
had so influenced his life hadhimself known this curious fancy. In the seventh
chapter he tells how,crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he
had sat, asTiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books
ofElephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and theflute-player
mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, hadcaroused with the
green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped inan ivory manger with a
jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, hadwandered through a corridor lined
with marble mirrors, looking roundwith haggard eyes for the reflection of the
dagger that was to end hisdays, and sick with that ennui, that terrible _tædium
vitæ_, that comeson those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a
clearemerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter ofpearl and
purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through theStreet of
Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on NeroCaesar as he passed by;
and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face withcolours, and plied the distaff
among the women, and brought the Moonfrom Carthage and given her in mystic
marriage to the Sun.Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic
chapter, and thetwo chapters immediately following, in which, as in some
curioustapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful
andbeautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had mademonstrous
or mad: Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and paintedher lips with a
scarlet poison that her lover might suck death from thedead thing he fondled;
Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as Paul theSecond, who sought in his vanity to
assume the title of Formosus, andwhose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand
florins, was bought at theprice of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used
hounds to chaseliving men and whose murdered body was covered with roses by a
harlotwho had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse, with Fratricideriding
beside him and his mantle stained with the blood of Perotto;Pietro Riario, the
young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, child andminion of Sixtus IV., whose
beauty was equalled only by his debauchery,and who received Leonora of Aragon in
a pavilion of white and crimsonsilk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded
a boy that he mightserve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose
melancholycould be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a
passionfor red blood, as other men have for red wine—the son of the Fiend, aswas
reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when gamblingwith him for
his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery took thename of Innocent and
into whose torpid veins the blood of three ladswas infused by a Jewish doctor;
Sigismondo Malatesta, the lover ofIsotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy
was burned at Rome as theenemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a
napkin, and gavepoison to Ginevra d’Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of
ashameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; CharlesVI., who
had so wildly adored his brother’s wife that a leper hadwarned him of the
insanity that was coming on him, and who, when hisbrain had sickened and grown
strange, could only be soothed by Saracencards painted with the images of love
and death and madness; and, inhis trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and
acanthuslike curls, GrifonettoBaglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and
Simonetto with his page,and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in
the yellowpiazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but
weep,and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.There was a horrible
fascination in them all. He saw them at night, andthey troubled his imagination
in the day. The Renaissance knew ofstrange manners of poisoning—poisoning by a
helmet and a lighted torch,by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a
gilded pomander and byan amber chain. Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book.
There weremoments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he
couldrealize his conception of the beautiful.CHAPTER XII.It was on the ninth of
November, the eve of his own thirty-eighthbirthday, as he often remembered
afterwards.He was walking home about eleven o’clock from Lord Henry’s, where
hehad been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was coldand
foggy. At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, aman passed
him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar ofhis grey ulster turned
up. He had a bag in his hand. Dorian recognizedhim. It was Basil Hallward. A
strange sense of fear, for which he couldnot account, came over him. He made no
sign of recognition and went onquickly in the direction of his own house.But
Hallward had seen him. Dorian heard him first stopping on thepavement and then
hurrying after him. In a few moments, his hand was onhis arm.“Dorian! What an
extraordinary piece of luck! I have been waiting foryou in your library ever
since nine o’clock. Finally I took pity onyour tired servant and told him to go
to bed, as he let me out. I amoff to Paris by the midnight train, and I
particularly wanted to seeyou before I left. I thought it was you, or rather
your fur coat, asyou passed me. But I wasn’t quite sure. Didn’t you recognize
me?”“In this fog, my dear Basil? Why, I can’t even recognize GrosvenorSquare. I
believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don’t feel atall certain about
it. I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seenyou for ages. But I suppose
you will be back soon?”“No: I am going to be out of England for six months. I
intend to take astudio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great
pictureI have in my head. However, it wasn’t about myself I wanted to talk.Here
we are at your door. Let me come in for a moment. I have somethingto say to
you.”“I shall be charmed. But won’t you miss your train?” said Dorian
Graylanguidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with
hislatch-key.The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at
hiswatch. “I have heaps of time,” he answered. “The train doesn’t go
tilltwelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven. In fact, I was on my way tothe
club to look for you, when I met you. You see, I shan’t have anydelay about
luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things. All I have withme is in this bag,
and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes.”Dorian looked at him and
smiled. “What a way for a fashionable painterto travel! A Gladstone bag and an
ulster! Come in, or the fog will getinto the house. And mind you don’t talk
about anything serious. Nothingis serious nowadays. At least nothing should
be.”Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into thelibrary.
There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth.The lamps were
lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case stood, withsome siphons of soda-water
and large cut-glass tumblers, on a littlemarqueterie table.“You see your servant
made me quite at home, Dorian. He gave meeverything I wanted, including your
best gold-tipped cigarettes. He isa most hospitable creature. I like him much
better than the Frenchmanyou used to have. What has become of the Frenchman, by
the bye?”Dorian shrugged his shoulders. “I believe he married Lady Radley’smaid,
and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker._Anglomanie_ is very
fashionable over there now, I hear. It seems sillyof the French, doesn’t it?
But—do you know?—he was not at all a badservant. I never liked him, but I had
nothing to complain about. Oneoften imagines things that are quite absurd. He
was really very devotedto me and seemed quite sorry when he went away. Have
anotherbrandy-and-soda? Or would you like hock-and-seltzer? I always
takehock-and-seltzer myself. There is sure to be some in the next room.”“Thanks,
I won’t have anything more,” said the painter, taking his capand coat off and
throwing them on the bag that he had placed in thecorner. “And now, my dear
fellow, I want to speak to you seriously.Don’t frown like that. You make it so
much more difficult for me.”“What is it all about?” cried Dorian in his petulant
way, flinginghimself down on the sofa. “I hope it is not about myself. I am
tired ofmyself to-night. I should like to be somebody else.”“It is about
yourself,” answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, “andI must say it to you.
I shall only keep you half an hour.”Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette. “Half an
hour!” he murmured.“It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for
your ownsake that I am speaking. I think it right that you should know that
themost dreadful things are being said against you in London.”“I don’t wish to
know anything about them. I love scandals about otherpeople, but scandals about
myself don’t interest me. They have not gotthe charm of novelty.”“They must
interest you, Dorian. Every gentleman is interested in hisgood name. You don’t
want people to talk of you as something vile anddegraded. Of course, you have
your position, and your wealth, and allthat kind of thing. But position and
wealth are not everything. Mindyou, I don’t believe these rumours at all. At
least, I can’t believethem when I see you. Sin is a thing that writes itself
across a man’sface. It cannot be concealed. People talk sometimes of secret
vices.There are no such things. If a wretched man has a vice, it shows itselfin
the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the moulding ofhis hands even.
Somebody—I won’t mention his name, but you knowhim—came to me last year to have
his portrait done. I had never seenhim before, and had never heard anything
about him at the time, thoughI have heard a good deal since. He offered an
extravagant price. Irefused him. There was something in the shape of his fingers
that Ihated. I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied about him.His
life is dreadful. But you, Dorian, with your pure, bright, innocentface, and
your marvellous untroubled youth—I can’t believe anythingagainst you. And yet I
see you very seldom, and you never come down tothe studio now, and when I am
away from you, and I hear all thesehideous things that people are whispering
about you, I don’t know whatto say. Why is it, Dorian, that a man like the Duke
of Berwick leavesthe room of a club when you enter it? Why is it that so many
gentlemenin London will neither go to your house or invite you to theirs?
Youused to be a friend of Lord Staveley. I met him at dinner last week.Your name
happened to come up in conversation, in connection with theminiatures you have
lent to the exhibition at the Dudley. Staveleycurled his lip and said that you
might have the most artistic tastes,but that you were a man whom no pure-minded
girl should be allowed toknow, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the same
room with. Ireminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked him what he
meant.He told me. He told me right out before everybody. It was horrible! Whyis
your friendship so fatal to young men? There was that wretched boyin the Guards
who committed suicide. You were his great friend. Therewas Sir Henry Ashton, who
had to leave England with a tarnished name.You and he were inseparable. What
about Adrian Singleton and hisdreadful end? What about Lord Kent’s only son and
his career? I met hisfather yesterday in St. James’s Street. He seemed broken
with shame andsorrow. What about the young Duke of Perth? What sort of life has
hegot now? What gentleman would associate with him?”“Stop, Basil. You are
talking about things of which you know nothing,”said Dorian Gray, biting his
lip, and with a note of infinite contemptin his voice. “You ask me why Berwick
leaves a room when I enter it. Itis because I know everything about his life,
not because he knowsanything about mine. With such blood as he has in his veins,
how couldhis record be clean? You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth.
DidI teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery? If Kent’ssilly son
takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me? IfAdrian Singleton writes
his friend’s name across a bill, am I hiskeeper? I know how people chatter in
England. The middle classes airtheir moral prejudices over their gross
dinner-tables, and whisperabout what they call the profligacies of their betters
in order to tryand pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms
withthe people they slander. In this country, it is enough for a man tohave
distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.And what sort
of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, leadthemselves? My dear
fellow, you forget that we are in the native landof the hypocrite.”“Dorian,”
cried Hallward, “that is not the question. England is badenough I know, and
English society is all wrong. That is the reason whyI want you to be fine. You
have not been fine. One has a right to judgeof a man by the effect he has over
his friends. Yours seem to lose allsense of honour, of goodness, of purity. You
have filled them with amadness for pleasure. They have gone down into the
depths. You led themthere. Yes: you led them there, and yet you can smile, as
you aresmiling now. And there is worse behind. I know you and Harry
areinseparable. Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should nothave
made his sister’s name a by-word.”“Take care, Basil. You go too far.”“I must
speak, and you must listen. You shall listen. When you met LadyGwendolen, not a
breath of scandal had ever touched her. Is there asingle decent woman in London
now who would drive with her in the park?Why, even her children are not allowed
to live with her. Then there areother stories—stories that you have been seen
creeping at dawn out ofdreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest
dens inLondon. Are they true? Can they be true? When I first heard them,
Ilaughed. I hear them now, and they make me shudder. What about
yourcountry-house and the life that is led there? Dorian, you don’t knowwhat is
said about you. I won’t tell you that I don’t want to preach toyou. I remember
Harry saying once that every man who turned himselfinto an amateur curate for
the moment always began by saying that, andthen proceeded to break his word. I
do want to preach to you. I wantyou to lead such a life as will make the world
respect you. I want youto have a clean name and a fair record. I want you to get
rid of thedreadful people you associate with. Don’t shrug your shoulders
likethat. Don’t be so indifferent. You have a wonderful influence. Let itbe for
good, not for evil. They say that you corrupt every one withwhom you become
intimate, and that it is quite sufficient for you toenter a house for shame of
some kind to follow after. I don’t knowwhether it is so or not. How should I
know? But it is said of you. I amtold things that it seems impossible to doubt.
Lord Gloucester was oneof my greatest friends at Oxford. He showed me a letter
that his wifehad written to him when she was dying alone in her villa at
Mentone.Your name was implicated in the most terrible confession I ever read.
Itold him that it was absurd—that I knew you thoroughly and that youwere
incapable of anything of the kind. Know you? I wonder do I knowyou? Before I
could answer that, I should have to see your soul.”“To see my soul!” muttered
Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa andturning almost white from fear.“Yes,”
answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in hisvoice, “to see your
soul. But only God can do that.”A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of
the younger man. “Youshall see it yourself, to-night!” he cried, seizing a lamp
from thetable. “Come: it is your own handiwork. Why shouldn’t you look at it?You
can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose. Nobodywould believe
you. If they did believe you, they would like me all thebetter for it. I know
the age better than you do, though you will prateabout it so tediously. Come, I
tell you. You have chattered enoughabout corruption. Now you shall look on it
face to face.”There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered. He
stamped hisfoot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner. He felt a
terriblejoy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret, and
thatthe man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of all hisshame was
to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideousmemory of what he had
done.“Yes,” he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly intohis
stern eyes, “I shall show you my soul. You shall see the thing thatyou fancy
only God can see.”Hallward started back. “This is blasphemy, Dorian!” he cried.
“You mustnot say things like that. They are horrible, and they don’t
meananything.”“You think so?” He laughed again.“I know so. As for what I said to
you to-night, I said it for yourgood. You know I have been always a stanch
friend to you.”“Don’t touch me. Finish what you have to say.”A twisted flash of
pain shot across the painter’s face. He paused for amoment, and a wild feeling
of pity came over him. After all, what righthad he to pry into the life of
Dorian Gray? If he had done a tithe ofwhat was rumoured about him, how much he
must have suffered! Then hestraightened himself up, and walked over to the
fire-place, and stoodthere, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike
ashes and theirthrobbing cores of flame.“I am waiting, Basil,” said the young
man in a hard clear voice.He turned round. “What I have to say is this,” he
cried. “You must giveme some answer to these horrible charges that are made
against you. Ifyou tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to
end, Ishall believe you. Deny them, Dorian, deny them! Can’t you see what Iam
going through? My God! don’t tell me that you are bad, and corrupt,and
shameful.”Dorian Gray smiled. There was a curl of contempt in his lips.
“Comeupstairs, Basil,” he said quietly. “I keep a diary of my life from dayto
day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written. I shallshow it to you
if you come with me.”“I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it. I see I
have missed mytrain. That makes no matter. I can go to-morrow. But don’t ask me
toread anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my question.”“That
shall be given to you upstairs. I could not give it here. Youwill not have to
read long.”CHAPTER XIII.He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil
Hallwardfollowing close behind. They walked softly, as men do instinctively
atnight. The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase. Arising wind
made some of the windows rattle.When they reached the top landing, Dorian set
the lamp down on thefloor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock. “You
insist onknowing, Basil?” he asked in a low voice.“Yes.”“I am delighted,” he
answered, smiling. Then he added, somewhatharshly, “You are the one man in the
world who is entitled to knoweverything about me. You have had more to do with
my life than youthink”; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.
A coldcurrent of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in aflame
of murky orange. He shuddered. “Shut the door behind you,” hewhispered, as he
placed the lamp on the table.Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled
expression. The room lookedas if it had not been lived in for years. A faded
Flemish tapestry, acurtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost
emptybook-case—that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and
atable. As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that wasstanding on the
mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was coveredwith dust and that the
carpet was in holes. A mouse ran scufflingbehind the wainscoting. There was a
damp odour of mildew.“So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil?
Draw thatcurtain back, and you will see mine.”The voice that spoke was cold and
cruel. “You are mad, Dorian, orplaying a part,” muttered Hallward, frowning.“You
won’t? Then I must do it myself,” said the young man, and he torethe curtain
from its rod and flung it on the ground.An exclamation of horror broke from the
painter’s lips as he saw in thedim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning
at him. There wassomething in its expression that filled him with disgust and
loathing.Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray’s own face that he was looking at!
Thehorror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that marvellousbeauty.
There was still some gold in the thinning hair and some scarleton the sensual
mouth. The sodden eyes had kept something of theloveliness of their blue, the
noble curves had not yet completelypassed away from chiselled nostrils and from
plastic throat. Yes, itwas Dorian himself. But who had done it? He seemed to
recognize his ownbrushwork, and the frame was his own design. The idea was
monstrous,yet he felt afraid. He seized the lighted candle, and held it to
thepicture. In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in longletters of
bright vermilion.It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire. He had
neverdone that. Still, it was his own picture. He knew it, and he felt as ifhis
blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice. His ownpicture! What
did it mean? Why had it altered? He turned and looked atDorian Gray with the
eyes of a sick man. His mouth twitched, and hisparched tongue seemed unable to
articulate. He passed his hand acrosshis forehead. It was dank with clammy
sweat.The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him withthat
strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who areabsorbed in a play
when some great artist is acting. There was neitherreal sorrow in it nor real
joy. There was simply the passion of thespectator, with perhaps a flicker of
triumph in his eyes. He had takenthe flower out of his coat, and was smelling
it, or pretending to doso.“What does this mean?” cried Hallward, at last. His
own voice soundedshrill and curious in his ears.“Years ago, when I was a boy,”
said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower inhis hand, “you met me, flattered me, and
taught me to be vain of mygood looks. One day you introduced me to a friend of
yours, whoexplained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of
methat revealed to me the wonder of beauty. In a mad moment that, evennow, I
don’t know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps youwould call it a
prayer....”“I remember it! Oh, how well I remember it! No! the thing
isimpossible. The room is damp. Mildew has got into the canvas. Thepaints I used
had some wretched mineral poison in them. I tell you thething is
impossible.”“Ah, what is impossible?” murmured the young man, going over to
thewindow and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.“You
told me you had destroyed it.”“I was wrong. It has destroyed me.”“I don’t
believe it is my picture.”“Can’t you see your ideal in it?” said Dorian
bitterly.“My ideal, as you call it...”“As you called it.”“There was nothing evil
in it, nothing shameful. You were to me such anideal as I shall never meet
again. This is the face of a satyr.”“It is the face of my soul.”“Christ! what a
thing I must have worshipped! It has the eyes of adevil.”“Each of us has heaven
and hell in him, Basil,” cried Dorian with awild gesture of despair.Hallward
turned again to the portrait and gazed at it. “My God! If itis true,” he
exclaimed, “and this is what you have done with your life,why, you must be worse
even than those who talk against you fancy youto be!” He held the light up again
to the canvas and examined it. Thesurface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as
he had left it. It wasfrom within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had
come. Throughsome strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were
slowlyeating the thing away. The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave wasnot so
fearful.His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor andlay
there sputtering. He placed his foot on it and put it out. Then heflung himself
into the rickety chair that was standing by the table andburied his face in his
hands.“Good God, Dorian, what a lesson! What an awful lesson!” There was
noanswer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window. “Pray,Dorian,
pray,” he murmured. “What is it that one was taught to say inone’s boyhood?
‘Lead us not into temptation. Forgive us our sins. Washaway our iniquities.’ Let
us say that together. The prayer of yourpride has been answered. The prayer of
your repentance will be answeredalso. I worshipped you too much. I am punished
for it. You worshippedyourself too much. We are both punished.”Dorian Gray
turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmedeyes. “It is too late,
Basil,” he faltered.“It is never too late, Dorian. Let us kneel down and try if
we cannotremember a prayer. Isn’t there a verse somewhere, ‘Though your sins
beas scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow’?”“Those words mean nothing
to me now.”“Hush! Don’t say that. You have done enough evil in your life. My
God!Don’t you see that accursed thing leering at us?”Dorian Gray glanced at the
picture, and suddenly an uncontrollablefeeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came
over him, as though it hadbeen suggested to him by the image on the canvas,
whispered into hisear by those grinning lips. The mad passions of a hunted
animal stirredwithin him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table,
morethan in his whole life he had ever loathed anything. He glanced
wildlyaround. Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that facedhim.
His eye fell on it. He knew what it was. It was a knife that hehad brought up,
some days before, to cut a piece of cord, and hadforgotten to take away with
him. He moved slowly towards it, passingHallward as he did so. As soon as he got
behind him, he seized it andturned round. Hallward stirred in his chair as if he
was going to rise.He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is
behindthe ear, crushing the man’s head down on the table and stabbing againand
again.There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one chokingwith
blood. Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively,waving grotesque,
stiff-fingered hands in the air. He stabbed him twicemore, but the man did not
move. Something began to trickle on thefloor. He waited for a moment, still
pressing the head down. Then hethrew the knife on the table, and listened.He
could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet. Heopened the
door and went out on the landing. The house was absolutelyquiet. No one was
about. For a few seconds he stood bending over thebalustrade and peering down
into the black seething well of darkness.Then he took out the key and returned
to the room, locking himself inas he did so.The thing was still seated in the
chair, straining over the table withbowed head, and humped back, and long
fantastic arms. Had it not beenfor the red jagged tear in the neck and the
clotted black pool that wasslowly widening on the table, one would have said
that the man wassimply asleep.How quickly it had all been done! He felt
strangely calm, and walkingover to the window, opened it and stepped out on the
balcony. The windhad blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous
peacock’stail, starred with myriads of golden eyes. He looked down and saw
thepoliceman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern onthe
doors of the silent houses. The crimson spot of a prowling hansomgleamed at the
corner and then vanished. A woman in a fluttering shawlwas creeping slowly by
the railings, staggering as she went. Now andthen she stopped and peered back.
Once, she began to sing in a hoarsevoice. The policeman strolled over and said
something to her. Shestumbled away, laughing. A bitter blast swept across the
square. Thegas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook
theirblack iron branches to and fro. He shivered and went back, closing
thewindow behind him.Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it.
He did noteven glance at the murdered man. He felt that the secret of the
wholething was not to realize the situation. The friend who had painted thefatal
portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of hislife. That was
enough.Then he remembered the lamp. It was a rather curious one of
Moorishworkmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of
burnishedsteel, and studded with coarse turquoises. Perhaps it might be missedby
his servant, and questions would be asked. He hesitated for amoment, then he
turned back and took it from the table. He could nothelp seeing the dead thing.
How still it was! How horribly white thelong hands looked! It was like a
dreadful wax image.Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly
downstairs. Thewoodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain. He
stoppedseveral times and waited. No: everything was still. It was merely
thesound of his own footsteps.When he reached the library, he saw the bag and
coat in the corner.They must be hidden away somewhere. He unlocked a secret
press that wasin the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious
disguises,and put them into it. He could easily burn them afterwards. Then
hepulled out his watch. It was twenty minutes to two.He sat down and began to
think. Every year—every month, almost—men werestrangled in England for what he
had done. There had been a madness ofmurder in the air. Some red star had come
too close to the earth....And yet, what evidence was there against him? Basil
Hallward had leftthe house at eleven. No one had seen him come in again. Most of
theservants were at Selby Royal. His valet had gone to bed.... Paris! Yes.It was
to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as hehad intended. With
his curious reserved habits, it would be monthsbefore any suspicions would be
roused. Months! Everything could bedestroyed long before then.A sudden thought
struck him. He put on his fur coat and hat and wentout into the hall. There he
paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of thepoliceman on the pavement outside and
seeing the flash of thebull’s-eye reflected in the window. He waited and held
his breath.After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out,
shuttingthe door very gently behind him. Then he began ringing the bell. Inabout
five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking verydrowsy.“I am sorry
to have had to wake you up, Francis,” he said, stepping in;“but I had forgotten
my latch-key. What time is it?”“Ten minutes past two, sir,” answered the man,
looking at the clock andblinking.“Ten minutes past two? How horribly late! You
must wake me at nineto-morrow. I have some work to do.”“All right, sir.”“Did any
one call this evening?”“Mr. Hallward, sir. He stayed here till eleven, and then
he went awayto catch his train.”“Oh! I am sorry I didn’t see him. Did he leave
any message?”“No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did
notfind you at the club.”“That will do, Francis. Don’t forget to call me at nine
to-morrow.”“No, sir.”The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.Dorian
Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into thelibrary. For a
quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room,biting his lip and thinking.
Then he took down the Blue Book from oneof the shelves and began to turn over
the leaves. “Alan Campbell, 152,Hertford Street, Mayfair.” Yes; that was the man
he wanted.CHAPTER XIV.At nine o’clock the next morning his servant came in with
a cup ofchocolate on a tray and opened the shutters. Dorian was sleeping
quitepeacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath hischeek. He
looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.The man had to
touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and ashe opened his eyes a faint
smile passed across his lips, as though hehad been lost in some delightful
dream. Yet he had not dreamed at all.His night had been untroubled by any images
of pleasure or of pain. Butyouth smiles without any reason. It is one of its
chiefest charms.He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip
hischocolate. The mellow November sun came streaming into the room. Thesky was
bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air. It was almostlike a morning in
May.Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent,blood-stained
feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves therewith terrible
distinctness. He winced at the memory of all that he hadsuffered, and for a
moment the same curious feeling of loathing forBasil Hallward that had made him
kill him as he sat in the chair cameback to him, and he grew cold with passion.
The dead man was stillsitting there, too, and in the sunlight now. How horrible
that was!Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.He felt that
if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sickenor grow mad. There were
sins whose fascination was more in the memorythan in the doing of them, strange
triumphs that gratified the pridemore than the passions, and gave to the
intellect a quickened sense ofjoy, greater than any joy they brought, or could
ever bring, to thesenses. But this was not one of them. It was a thing to be
driven outof the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it
mightstrangle one itself.When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across
his forehead, andthen got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his
usualcare, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie
andscarf-pin and changing his rings more than once. He spent a long timealso
over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valetabout some new
liveries that he was thinking of getting made for theservants at Selby, and
going through his correspondence. At some of theletters, he smiled. Three of
them bored him. One he read several timesover and then tore up with a slight
look of annoyance in his face.“That awful thing, a woman’s memory!” as Lord
Henry had once said.After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his
lips slowlywith a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to
thetable, sat down and wrote two letters. One he put in his pocket, theother he
handed to the valet.“Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if
Mr. Campbellis out of town, get his address.”As soon as he was alone, he lit a
cigarette and began sketching upon apiece of paper, drawing first flowers and
bits of architecture, andthen human faces. Suddenly he remarked that every face
that he drewseemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward. He frowned,
andgetting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.He was
determined that he would not think about what had happened untilit became
absolutely necessary that he should do so.When he had stretched himself on the
sofa, he looked at the title-pageof the book. It was Gautier’s “Émaux et
Camées”, Charpentier’sJapanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching. The
binding was ofcitron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and
dottedpomegranates. It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton. As heturned
over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand ofLacenaire, the cold
yellow hand “_du supplice encore mal lavée_,” withits downy red hairs and its
“_doigts de faune_.” He glanced at his ownwhite taper fingers, shuddering
slightly in spite of himself, andpassed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas
upon Venice:Sur une gamme chromatique, Le sein de perles ruisselant,La Vénus de
l’Adriatique Sort de l’eau son corps rose et blanc.Les dômes, sur l’azur des
ondes Suivant la phrase au pur contour,S’enflent comme des gorges rondes Que
soulève un soupir d’amour.L’esquif aborde et me dépose, Jetant son amarre au
pilier,Devant une façade rose, Sur le marbre d’un escalier.How exquisite they
were! As one read them, one seemed to be floatingdown the green water-ways of
the pink and pearl city, seated in a blackgondola with silver prow and trailing
curtains. The mere lines lookedto him like those straight lines of
turquoise-blue that follow one asone pushes out to the Lido. The sudden flashes
of colour reminded himof the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that
flutter round thetall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace,
throughthe dim, dust-stained arcades. Leaning back with half-closed eyes, hekept
saying over and over to himself:“Devant une façade rose,Sur le marbre d’un
escalier.”The whole of Venice was in those two lines. He remembered the
autumnthat he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him tomad
delightful follies. There was romance in every place. But Venice,like Oxford,
had kept the background for romance, and, to the trueromantic, background was
everything, or almost everything. Basil hadbeen with him part of the time, and
had gone wild over Tintoret. PoorBasil! What a horrible way for a man to die!He
sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget. He readof the
swallows that fly in and out of the little _café_ at Smyrnawhere the Hadjis sit
counting their amber beads and the turbanedmerchants smoke their long tasselled
pipes and talk gravely to eachother; he read of the Obelisk in the Place de la
Concorde that weepstears of granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be
back bythe hot, lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and
rose-redibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with
smallberyl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to broodover
those verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tellof that curious
statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the“_monstre charmant_” that
couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre.But after a time the book fell from
his hand. He grew nervous, and ahorrible fit of terror came over him. What if
Alan Campbell should beout of England? Days would elapse before he could come
back. Perhaps hemight refuse to come. What could he do then? Every moment was of
vitalimportance.They had been great friends once, five years before—almost
inseparable,indeed. Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end. When they met
insociety now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled: Alan Campbell neverdid.He was
an extremely clever young man, though he had no realappreciation of the visible
arts, and whatever little sense of thebeauty of poetry he possessed he had
gained entirely from Dorian. Hisdominant intellectual passion was for science.
At Cambridge he hadspent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and
had takena good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year. Indeed, he
wasstill devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of hisown in
which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to theannoyance of his
mother, who had set her heart on his standing forParliament and had a vague idea
that a chemist was a person who made upprescriptions. He was an excellent
musician, however, as well, andplayed both the violin and the piano better than
most amateurs. Infact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian
Graytogether—music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to beable
to exercise whenever he wished—and, indeed, exercised oftenwithout being
conscious of it. They had met at Lady Berkshire’s thenight that Rubinstein
played there, and after that used to be alwaysseen together at the opera and
wherever good music was going on. Foreighteen months their intimacy lasted.
Campbell was always either atSelby Royal or in Grosvenor Square. To him, as to
many others, DorianGray was the type of everything that is wonderful and
fascinating inlife. Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one
everknew. But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when theymet and
that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any party atwhich Dorian Gray
was present. He had changed, too—was strangelymelancholy at times, appeared
almost to dislike hearing music, andwould never himself play, giving as his
excuse, when he was calledupon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had
no time left inwhich to practise. And this was certainly true. Every day he
seemed tobecome more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or
twicein some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain
curiousexperiments.This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for. Every second he
keptglancing at the clock. As the minutes went by he became horriblyagitated. At
last he got up and began to pace up and down the room,looking like a beautiful
caged thing. He took long stealthy strides.His hands were curiously cold.The
suspense became unbearable. Time seemed to him to be crawling withfeet of lead,
while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards thejagged edge of some black
cleft of precipice. He knew what was waitingfor him there; saw it, indeed, and,
shuddering, crushed with dank handshis burning lids as though he would have
robbed the very brain of sightand driven the eyeballs back into their cave. It
was useless. The brainhad its own food on which it battened, and the
imagination, madegrotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by
pain,danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through movingmasks.
Then, suddenly, time stopped for him. Yes: that blind,slow-breathing thing
crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time beingdead, raced nimbly on in
front, and dragged a hideous future from itsgrave, and showed it to him. He
stared at it. Its very horror made himstone.At last the door opened and his
servant entered. He turned glazed eyesupon him.“Mr. Campbell, sir,” said the
man.A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came backto his
cheeks.“Ask him to come in at once, Francis.” He felt that he was himselfagain.
His mood of cowardice had passed away.The man bowed and retired. In a few
moments, Alan Campbell walked in,looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor
being intensified by hiscoal-black hair and dark eyebrows.“Alan! This is kind of
you. I thank you for coming.”“I had intended never to enter your house again,
Gray. But you said itwas a matter of life and death.” His voice was hard and
cold. He spokewith slow deliberation. There was a look of contempt in the
steadysearching gaze that he turned on Dorian. He kept his hands in thepockets
of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed thegesture with which he
had been greeted.“Yes: it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than
oneperson. Sit down.”Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite
to him. Thetwo men’s eyes met. In Dorian’s there was infinite pity. He knew
thatwhat he was going to do was dreadful.After a strained moment of silence, he
leaned across and said, veryquietly, but watching the effect of each word upon
the face of him hehad sent for, “Alan, in a locked room at the top of this
house, a roomto which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a
table.He has been dead ten hours now. Don’t stir, and don’t look at me likethat.
Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do notconcern you.
What you have to do is this—”“Stop, Gray. I don’t want to know anything further.
Whether what youhave told me is true or not true doesn’t concern me. I entirely
declineto be mixed up in your life. Keep your horrible secrets to yourself.They
don’t interest me any more.”“Alan, they will have to interest you. This one will
have to interestyou. I am awfully sorry for you, Alan. But I can’t help myself.
You arethe one man who is able to save me. I am forced to bring you into
thematter. I have no option. Alan, you are scientific. You know aboutchemistry
and things of that kind. You have made experiments. What youhave got to do is to
destroy the thing that is upstairs—to destroy itso that not a vestige of it will
be left. Nobody saw this person comeinto the house. Indeed, at the present
moment he is supposed to be inParis. He will not be missed for months. When he
is missed, there mustbe no trace of him found here. You, Alan, you must change
him, andeverything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that I
mayscatter in the air.”“You are mad, Dorian.”“Ah! I was waiting for you to call
me Dorian.”“You are mad, I tell you—mad to imagine that I would raise a finger
tohelp you, mad to make this monstrous confession. I will have nothing todo with
this matter, whatever it is. Do you think I am going to perilmy reputation for
you? What is it to me what devil’s work you are upto?”“It was suicide, Alan.”“I
am glad of that. But who drove him to it? You, I should fancy.”“Do you still
refuse to do this for me?”“Of course I refuse. I will have absolutely nothing to
do with it. Idon’t care what shame comes on you. You deserve it all. I should
not besorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced. How dare you ask me, ofall
men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror? I should havethought you knew
more about people’s characters. Your friend Lord HenryWotton can’t have taught
you much about psychology, whatever else hehas taught you. Nothing will induce
me to stir a step to help you. Youhave come to the wrong man. Go to some of your
friends. Don’t come tome.”“Alan, it was murder. I killed him. You don’t know
what he had made mesuffer. Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the
making or themarring of it than poor Harry has had. He may not have intended it,
theresult was the same.”“Murder! Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come
to? I shall notinform upon you. It is not my business. Besides, without my
stirring inthe matter, you are certain to be arrested. Nobody ever commits a
crimewithout doing something stupid. But I will have nothing to do with it.”“You
must have something to do with it. Wait, wait a moment; listen tome. Only
listen, Alan. All I ask of you is to perform a certainscientific experiment. You
go to hospitals and dead-houses, and thehorrors that you do there don’t affect
you. If in some hideousdissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man
lying on aleaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to
flowthrough, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject. Youwould
not turn a hair. You would not believe that you were doinganything wrong. On the
contrary, you would probably feel that you werebenefiting the human race, or
increasing the sum of knowledge in theworld, or gratifying intellectual
curiosity, or something of that kind.What I want you to do is merely what you
have often done before.Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than
what you areaccustomed to work at. And, remember, it is the only piece of
evidenceagainst me. If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to
bediscovered unless you help me.”“I have no desire to help you. You forget that.
I am simply indifferentto the whole thing. It has nothing to do with me.”“Alan,
I entreat you. Think of the position I am in. Just before youcame I almost
fainted with terror. You may know terror yourself someday. No! don’t think of
that. Look at the matter purely from thescientific point of view. You don’t
inquire where the dead things onwhich you experiment come from. Don’t inquire
now. I have told you toomuch as it is. But I beg of you to do this. We were
friends once,Alan.”“Don’t speak about those days, Dorian—they are dead.”“The
dead linger sometimes. The man upstairs will not go away. He issitting at the
table with bowed head and outstretched arms. Alan! Alan!If you don’t come to my
assistance, I am ruined. Why, they will hangme, Alan! Don’t you understand? They
will hang me for what I havedone.”“There is no good in prolonging this scene. I
absolutely refuse to doanything in the matter. It is insane of you to ask
me.”“You refuse?”“Yes.”“I entreat you, Alan.”“It is useless.”The same look of
pity came into Dorian Gray’s eyes. Then he stretchedout his hand, took a piece
of paper, and wrote something on it. He readit over twice, folded it carefully,
and pushed it across the table.Having done this, he got up and went over to the
window.Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, andopened
it. As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell backin his chair. A
horrible sense of sickness came over him. He felt as ifhis heart was beating
itself to death in some empty hollow.After two or three minutes of terrible
silence, Dorian turned round andcame and stood behind him, putting his hand upon
his shoulder.“I am so sorry for you, Alan,” he murmured, “but you leave me
noalternative. I have a letter written already. Here it is. You see theaddress.
If you don’t help me, I must send it. If you don’t help me, Iwill send it. You
know what the result will be. But you are going tohelp me. It is impossible for
you to refuse now. I tried to spare you.You will do me the justice to admit
that. You were stern, harsh,offensive. You treated me as no man has ever dared
to treat me—noliving man, at any rate. I bore it all. Now it is for me to
dictateterms.”Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed
throughhim.“Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan. You know what they are.
Thething is quite simple. Come, don’t work yourself into this fever. Thething
has to be done. Face it, and do it.”A groan broke from Campbell’s lips and he
shivered all over. Theticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to
be dividingtime into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to
beborne. He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round
hisforehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had alreadycome
upon him. The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead.It was
intolerable. It seemed to crush him.“Come, Alan, you must decide at once.”“I
cannot do it,” he said, mechanically, as though words could alterthings.“You
must. You have no choice. Don’t delay.”He hesitated a moment. “Is there a fire
in the room upstairs?”“Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos.”“I shall have to
go home and get some things from the laboratory.”“No, Alan, you must not leave
the house. Write out on a sheet ofnotepaper what you want and my servant will
take a cab and bring thethings back to you.”Campbell scrawled a few lines,
blotted them, and addressed an envelopeto his assistant. Dorian took the note up
and read it carefully. Thenhe rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with
orders to return assoon as possible and to bring the things with him.As the hall
door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got upfrom the chair, went
over to the chimney-piece. He was shivering with akind of ague. For nearly
twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke. Afly buzzed noisily about the room,
and the ticking of the clock waslike the beat of a hammer.As the chime struck
one, Campbell turned round, and looking at DorianGray, saw that his eyes were
filled with tears. There was something inthe purity and refinement of that sad
face that seemed to enrage him.“You are infamous, absolutely infamous!” he
muttered.“Hush, Alan. You have saved my life,” said Dorian.“Your life? Good
heavens! what a life that is! You have gone fromcorruption to corruption, and
now you have culminated in crime. Indoing what I am going to do—what you force
me to do—it is not of yourlife that I am thinking.”“Ah, Alan,” murmured Dorian
with a sigh, “I wish you had a thousandthpart of the pity for me that I have for
you.” He turned away as hespoke and stood looking out at the garden. Campbell
made no answer.After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the
servantentered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coilof
steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.“Shall I
leave the things here, sir?” he asked Campbell.“Yes,” said Dorian. “And I am
afraid, Francis, that I have anothererrand for you. What is the name of the man
at Richmond who suppliesSelby with orchids?”“Harden, sir.”“Yes—Harden. You must
go down to Richmond at once, see Hardenpersonally, and tell him to send twice as
many orchids as I ordered,and to have as few white ones as possible. In fact, I
don’t want anywhite ones. It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very
prettyplace—otherwise I wouldn’t bother you about it.”“No trouble, sir. At what
time shall I be back?”Dorian looked at Campbell. “How long will your experiment
take, Alan?”he said in a calm indifferent voice. The presence of a third person
inthe room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.Campbell frowned and bit his
lip. “It will take about five hours,” heanswered.“It will be time enough, then,
if you are back at half-past seven,Francis. Or stay: just leave my things out
for dressing. You can havethe evening to yourself. I am not dining at home, so I
shall not wantyou.”“Thank you, sir,” said the man, leaving the room.“Now, Alan,
there is not a moment to be lost. How heavy this chest is!I’ll take it for you.
You bring the other things.” He spoke rapidly andin an authoritative manner.
Campbell felt dominated by him. They leftthe room together.When they reached the
top landing, Dorian took out the key and turnedit in the lock. Then he stopped,
and a troubled look came into hiseyes. He shuddered. “I don’t think I can go in,
Alan,” he murmured.“It is nothing to me. I don’t require you,” said Campbell
coldly.Dorian half opened the door. As he did so, he saw the face of hisportrait
leering in the sunlight. On the floor in front of it the torncurtain was lying.
He remembered that the night before he hadforgotten, for the first time in his
life, to hide the fatal canvas,and was about to rush forward, when he drew back
with a shudder.What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening,
onone of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood? How horribleit
was!—more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the silentthing that
he knew was stretched across the table, the thing whosegrotesque misshapen
shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it hadnot stirred, but was still
there, as he had left it.He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little
wider, and withhalf-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined
thathe would not look even once upon the dead man. Then, stooping down andtaking
up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over thepicture.There he
stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixedthemselves on the
intricacies of the pattern before him. He heardCampbell bringing in the heavy
chest, and the irons, and the otherthings that he had required for his dreadful
work. He began to wonderif he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what
they hadthought of each other.“Leave me now,” said a stern voice behind him.He
turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had beenthrust back
into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into aglistening yellow face. As he
was going downstairs, he heard the keybeing turned in the lock.It was long after
seven when Campbell came back into the library. Hewas pale, but absolutely calm.
“I have done what you asked me to do,”he muttered. “And now, good-bye. Let us
never see each other again.”“You have saved me from ruin, Alan. I cannot forget
that,” said Doriansimply.As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs. There
was a horriblesmell of nitric acid in the room. But the thing that had been
sittingat the table was gone.CHAPTER XV.That evening, at eight-thirty,
exquisitely dressed and wearing a largebutton-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray
was ushered into LadyNarborough’s drawing-room by bowing servants. His forehead
wasthrobbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but hismanner as
he bent over his hostess’s hand was as easy and graceful asever. Perhaps one
never seems so much at one’s ease as when one has toplay a part. Certainly no
one looking at Dorian Gray that night couldhave believed that he had passed
through a tragedy as horrible as anytragedy of our age. Those finely shaped
fingers could never haveclutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have
cried out on Godand goodness. He himself could not help wondering at the calm of
hisdemeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of adouble
life.It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, whowas a
very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as theremains of really
remarkable ugliness. She had proved an excellent wifeto one of our most tedious
ambassadors, and having buried her husbandproperly in a marble mausoleum, which
she had herself designed, andmarried off her daughters to some rich, rather
elderly men, she devotedherself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French
cookery, andFrench _esprit_ when she could get it.Dorian was one of her especial
favourites, and she always told him thatshe was extremely glad she had not met
him in early life. “I know, mydear, I should have fallen madly in love with
you,” she used to say,“and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake.
It is mostfortunate that you were not thought of at the time. As it was,
ourbonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying toraise
the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody.However, that was all
Narborough’s fault. He was dreadfullyshort-sighted, and there is no pleasure in
taking in a husband whonever sees anything.”Her guests this evening were rather
tedious. The fact was, as sheexplained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one
of her marrieddaughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to
makematters worse, had actually brought her husband with her. “I think itis most
unkind of her, my dear,” she whispered. “Of course I go andstay with them every
summer after I come from Homburg, but then an oldwoman like me must have fresh
air sometimes, and besides, I really wakethem up. You don’t know what an
existence they lead down there. It ispure unadulterated country life. They get
up early, because they haveso much to do, and go to bed early, because they have
so little tothink about. There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood
sincethe time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleepafter
dinner. You shan’t sit next either of them. You shall sit by meand amuse
me.”Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room. Yes:it was
certainly a tedious party. Two of the people he had never seenbefore, and the
others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of thosemiddle-aged mediocrities so
common in London clubs who have no enemies,but are thoroughly disliked by their
friends; Lady Ruxton, anoverdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose,
who was alwaystrying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain
that toher great disappointment no one would ever believe anything againsther;
Mrs. Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp andVenetian-red hair;
Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess’s daughter, a dowdydull girl, with one of those
characteristic British faces that, onceseen, are never remembered; and her
husband, a red-cheeked,white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class,
was under theimpression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack
ofideas.He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at
thegreat ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on themauve-draped
mantelshelf, exclaimed: “How horrid of Henry Wotton to beso late! I sent round
to him this morning on chance and he promisedfaithfully not to disappoint me.”It
was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the dooropened and he
heard his slow musical voice lending charm to someinsincere apology, he ceased
to feel bored.But at dinner he could not eat anything. Plate after plate went
awayuntasted. Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called “aninsult to
poor Adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you,” andnow and then Lord
Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silenceand abstracted manner. From
time to time the butler filled his glasswith champagne. He drank eagerly, and
his thirst seemed to increase.“Dorian,” said Lord Henry at last, as the
_chaud-froid_ was beinghanded round, “what is the matter with you to-night? You
are quite outof sorts.”“I believe he is in love,” cried Lady Narborough, “and
that he isafraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous. He is quite right.
Icertainly should.”“Dear Lady Narborough,” murmured Dorian, smiling, “I have not
been inlove for a whole week—not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left
town.”“How you men can fall in love with that woman!” exclaimed the old lady.“I
really cannot understand it.”“It is simply because she remembers you when you
were a little girl,Lady Narborough,” said Lord Henry. “She is the one link
between us andyour short frocks.”“She does not remember my short frocks at all,
Lord Henry. But Iremember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how
_décolletée_she was then.”“She is still _décolletée_,” he answered, taking an
olive in his longfingers; “and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like
an_édition de luxe_ of a bad French novel. She is really wonderful, andfull of
surprises. Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary.When her third
husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief.”“How can you, Harry!” cried
Dorian.“It is a most romantic explanation,” laughed the hostess. “But herthird
husband, Lord Henry! You don’t mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?”“Certainly,
Lady Narborough.”“I don’t believe a word of it.”“Well, ask Mr. Gray. He is one
of her most intimate friends.”“Is it true, Mr. Gray?”“She assures me so, Lady
Narborough,” said Dorian. “I asked herwhether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she
had their hearts embalmed andhung at her girdle. She told me she didn’t, because
none of them hadhad any hearts at all.”“Four husbands! Upon my word that is
_trop de zêle_.”“_Trop d’audace_, I tell her,” said Dorian.“Oh! she is audacious
enough for anything, my dear. And what is Ferrollike? I don’t know him.”“The
husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes,”said Lord
Henry, sipping his wine.Lady Narborough hit him with her fan. “Lord Henry, I am
not at allsurprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked.”“But what
world says that?” asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows.“It can only be the
next world. This world and I are on excellentterms.”“Everybody I know says you
are very wicked,” cried the old lady,shaking her head.Lord Henry looked serious
for some moments. “It is perfectlymonstrous,” he said, at last, “the way people
go about nowadays sayingthings against one behind one’s back that are absolutely
and entirelytrue.”“Isn’t he incorrigible?” cried Dorian, leaning forward in his
chair.“I hope so,” said his hostess, laughing. “But really, if you allworship
Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marryagain so as to be
in the fashion.”“You will never marry again, Lady Narborough,” broke in Lord
Henry.“You were far too happy. When a woman marries again, it is because
shedetested her first husband. When a man marries again, it is because headored
his first wife. Women try their luck; men risk theirs.”“Narborough wasn’t
perfect,” cried the old lady.“If he had been, you would not have loved him, my
dear lady,” was therejoinder. “Women love us for our defects. If we have enough
of them,they will forgive us everything, even our intellects. You will neverask
me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough,but it is
quite true.”“Of course it is true, Lord Henry. If we women did not love you
foryour defects, where would you all be? Not one of you would ever bemarried.
You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors. Not, however,that that would alter
you much. Nowadays all the married men live likebachelors, and all the bachelors
like married men.”“_Fin de siêcle_,” murmured Lord Henry.“_Fin du globe_,”
answered his hostess.“I wish it were _fin du globe_,” said Dorian with a sigh.
“Life is agreat disappointment.”“Ah, my dear,” cried Lady Narborough, putting on
her gloves, “don’ttell me that you have exhausted life. When a man says that one
knowsthat life has exhausted him. Lord Henry is very wicked, and I sometimeswish
that I had been; but you are made to be good—you look so good. Imust find you a
nice wife. Lord Henry, don’t you think that Mr. Grayshould get married?”“I am
always telling him so, Lady Narborough,” said Lord Henry with abow.“Well, we
must look out for a suitable match for him. I shall gothrough Debrett carefully
to-night and draw out a list of all theeligible young ladies.”“With their ages,
Lady Narborough?” asked Dorian.“Of course, with their ages, slightly edited. But
nothing must be donein a hurry. I want it to be what _The Morning Post_ calls a
suitablealliance, and I want you both to be happy.”“What nonsense people talk
about happy marriages!” exclaimed LordHenry. “A man can be happy with any woman,
as long as he does not loveher.”“Ah! what a cynic you are!” cried the old lady,
pushing back her chairand nodding to Lady Ruxton. “You must come and dine with
me soon again.You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir
Andrewprescribes for me. You must tell me what people you would like to
meet,though. I want it to be a delightful gathering.”“I like men who have a
future and women who have a past,” he answered.“Or do you think that would make
it a petticoat party?”“I fear so,” she said, laughing, as she stood up. “A
thousand pardons,my dear Lady Ruxton,” she added, “I didn’t see you hadn’t
finished yourcigarette.”“Never mind, Lady Narborough. I smoke a great deal too
much. I am goingto limit myself, for the future.”“Pray don’t, Lady Ruxton,” said
Lord Henry. “Moderation is a fatalthing. Enough is as bad as a meal. More than
enough is as good as afeast.”Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously. “You must
come and explain thatto me some afternoon, Lord Henry. It sounds a fascinating
theory,” shemurmured, as she swept out of the room.“Now, mind you don’t stay too
long over your politics and scandal,”cried Lady Narborough from the door. “If
you do, we are sure tosquabble upstairs.”The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up
solemnly from the foot of thetable and came up to the top. Dorian Gray changed
his seat and went andsat by Lord Henry. Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud
voice about thesituation in the House of Commons. He guffawed at his
adversaries. Theword _doctrinaire_—word full of terror to the British
mind—reappearedfrom time to time between his explosions. An alliterative prefix
servedas an ornament of oratory. He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnaclesof
thought. The inherited stupidity of the race—sound English commonsense he
jovially termed it—was shown to be the proper bulwark forsociety.A smile curved
Lord Henry’s lips, and he turned round and looked atDorian.“Are you better, my
dear fellow?” he asked. “You seemed rather out ofsorts at dinner.”“I am quite
well, Harry. I am tired. That is all.”“You were charming last night. The little
duchess is quite devoted toyou. She tells me she is going down to Selby.”“She
has promised to come on the twentieth.”“Is Monmouth to be there, too?”“Oh, yes,
Harry.”“He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her. She is
veryclever, too clever for a woman. She lacks the indefinable charm ofweakness.
It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the imageprecious. Her feet are
very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.White porcelain feet, if you like.
They have been through the fire, andwhat fire does not destroy, it hardens. She
has had experiences.”“How long has she been married?” asked Dorian.“An eternity,
she tells me. I believe, according to the peerage, it isten years, but ten years
with Monmouth must have been like eternity,with time thrown in. Who else is
coming?”“Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess,
GeoffreyClouston, the usual set. I have asked Lord Grotrian.”“I like him,” said
Lord Henry. “A great many people don’t, but I findhim charming. He atones for
being occasionally somewhat overdressed bybeing always absolutely over-educated.
He is a very modern type.”“I don’t know if he will be able to come, Harry. He
may have to go toMonte Carlo with his father.”“Ah! what a nuisance people’s
people are! Try and make him come. By theway, Dorian, you ran off very early
last night. You left before eleven.What did you do afterwards? Did you go
straight home?”Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.“No, Harry,” he said
at last, “I did not get home till nearly three.”“Did you go to the club?”“Yes,”
he answered. Then he bit his lip. “No, I don’t mean that. Ididn’t go to the
club. I walked about. I forget what I did.... Howinquisitive you are, Harry! You
always want to know what one has beendoing. I always want to forget what I have
been doing. I came in athalf-past two, if you wish to know the exact time. I had
left mylatch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in. If you want
anycorroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him.”Lord Henry shrugged
his shoulders. “My dear fellow, as if I cared! Letus go up to the drawing-room.
No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman.Something has happened to you, Dorian. Tell me
what it is. You are notyourself to-night.”“Don’t mind me, Harry. I am irritable,
and out of temper. I shall comeround and see you to-morrow, or next day. Make my
excuses to LadyNarborough. I shan’t go upstairs. I shall go home. I must go
home.”“All right, Dorian. I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time.The
duchess is coming.”“I will try to be there, Harry,” he said, leaving the room.
As he droveback to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror
hethought he had strangled had come back to him. Lord Henry’s casualquestioning
had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wantedhis nerve still. Things
that were dangerous had to be destroyed. Hewinced. He hated the idea of even
touching them.Yet it had to be done. He realized that, and when he had locked
thedoor of his library, he opened the secret press into which he hadthrust Basil
Hallward’s coat and bag. A huge fire was blazing. He piledanother log on it. The
smell of the singeing clothes and burningleather was horrible. It took him
three-quarters of an hour to consumeeverything. At the end he felt faint and
sick, and having lit someAlgerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he
bathed his hands andforehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.Suddenly he
started. His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawednervously at his underlip.
Between two of the windows stood a largeFlorentine cabinet, made out of ebony
and inlaid with ivory and bluelapis. He watched it as though it were a thing
that could fascinate andmake afraid, as though it held something that he longed
for and yetalmost loathed. His breath quickened. A mad craving came over him.
Helit a cigarette and then threw it away. His eyelids drooped till thelong
fringed lashes almost touched his cheek. But he still watched thecabinet. At
last he got up from the sofa on which he had been lying,went over to it, and
having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring. Atriangular drawer passed slowly
out. His fingers moved instinctivelytowards it, dipped in, and closed on
something. It was a small Chinesebox of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately
wrought, the sidespatterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with
roundcrystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads. He opened it. Insidewas a
green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy andpersistent.He
hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon hisface. Then
shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terriblyhot, he drew himself up
and glanced at the clock. It was twenty minutesto twelve. He put the box back,
shutting the cabinet doors as he didso, and went into his bedroom.As midnight
was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray,dressed commonly, and
with a muffler wrapped round his throat, creptquietly out of his house. In Bond
Street he found a hansom with a goodhorse. He hailed it and in a low voice gave
the driver an address.The man shook his head. “It is too far for me,” he
muttered.“Here is a sovereign for you,” said Dorian. “You shall have another
ifyou drive fast.”“All right, sir,” answered the man, “you will be there in an
hour,” andafter his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove
rapidlytowards the river.CHAPTER XVI.A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred
street-lamps looked ghastlyin the dripping mist. The public-houses were just
closing, and dim menand women were clustering in broken groups round their
doors. From someof the bars came the sound of horrible laughter. In others,
drunkardsbrawled and screamed.Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over
his forehead, DorianGray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the
great city, andnow and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had
saidto him on the first day they had met, “To cure the soul by means of
thesenses, and the senses by means of the soul.” Yes, that was the secret.He had
often tried it, and would try it again now. There were opiumdens where one could
buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory ofold sins could be destroyed by
the madness of sins that were new.The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow
skull. From time to time ahuge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and
hid it. Thegas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy. Once
theman lost his way and had to drive back half a mile. A steam rose fromthe
horse as it splashed up the puddles. The sidewindows of the hansomwere clogged
with a grey-flannel mist.“To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the
senses by means ofthe soul!” How the words rang in his ears! His soul,
certainly, wassick to death. Was it true that the senses could cure it?
Innocentblood had been spilled. What could atone for that? Ah! for that therewas
no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulnesswas possible
still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thingout, to crush it as
one would crush the adder that had stung one.Indeed, what right had Basil to
have spoken to him as he had done? Whohad made him a judge over others? He had
said things that weredreadful, horrible, not to be endured.On and on plodded the
hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at eachstep. He thrust up the trap and
called to the man to drive faster. Thehideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at
him. His throat burned andhis delicate hands twitched nervously together. He
struck at the horsemadly with his stick. The driver laughed and whipped up. He
laughed inanswer, and the man was silent.The way seemed interminable, and the
streets like the black web of somesprawling spider. The monotony became
unbearable, and as the mistthickened, he felt afraid.Then they passed by lonely
brickfields. The fog was lighter here, andhe could see the strange,
bottle-shaped kilns with their orange,fanlike tongues of fire. A dog barked as
they went by, and far away inthe darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed. The
horse stumbled in arut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.After some
time they left the clay road and rattled again overrough-paven streets. Most of
the windows were dark, but now and thenfantastic shadows were silhouetted
against some lamplit blind. Hewatched them curiously. They moved like monstrous
marionettes and madegestures like live things. He hated them. A dull rage was in
his heart.As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an
opendoor, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards. Thedriver
beat at them with his whip.It is said that passion makes one think in a circle.
Certainly withhideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and
reshapedthose subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found
inthem the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified,
byintellectual approval, passions that without such justification wouldstill
have dominated his temper. From cell to cell of his brain creptthe one thought;
and the wild desire to live, most terrible of allman’s appetites, quickened into
force each trembling nerve and fibre.Ugliness that had once been hateful to him
because it made things real,became dear to him now for that very reason.
Ugliness was the onereality. The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude
violence ofdisordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were
morevivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the graciousshapes
of art, the dreamy shadows of song. They were what he needed forforgetfulness.
In three days he would be free.Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top
of a dark lane. Overthe low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose
the blackmasts of ships. Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to
theyards.“Somewhere about here, sir, ain’t it?” he asked huskily through
thetrap.Dorian started and peered round. “This will do,” he answered, andhaving
got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he hadpromised him, he
walked quickly in the direction of the quay. Here andthere a lantern gleamed at
the stern of some huge merchantman. Thelight shook and splintered in the
puddles. A red glare came from anoutward-bound steamer that was coaling. The
slimy pavement looked likea wet mackintosh.He hurried on towards the left,
glancing back now and then to see if hewas being followed. In about seven or
eight minutes he reached a smallshabby house that was wedged in between two
gaunt factories. In one ofthe top-windows stood a lamp. He stopped and gave a
peculiar knock.After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain
beingunhooked. The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a wordto
the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the shadow ashe passed. At
the end of the hall hung a tattered green curtain thatswayed and shook in the
gusty wind which had followed him in from thestreet. He dragged it aside and
entered a long low room which looked asif it had once been a third-rate
dancing-saloon. Shrill flaringgas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown
mirrors that facedthem, were ranged round the walls. Greasy reflectors of ribbed
tinbacked them, making quivering disks of light. The floor was coveredwith
ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud, andstained with dark
rings of spilled liquor. Some Malays were crouchingby a little charcoal stove,
playing with bone counters and showingtheir white teeth as they chattered. In
one corner, with his headburied in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and
by the tawdrilypainted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard
women,mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat with
anexpression of disgust. “He thinks he’s got red ants on him,” laughedone of
them, as Dorian passed by. The man looked at her in terror andbegan to
whimper.At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to
adarkened chamber. As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, theheavy odour
of opium met him. He heaved a deep breath, and his nostrilsquivered with
pleasure. When he entered, a young man with smooth yellowhair, who was bending
over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked upat him and nodded in a
hesitating manner.“You here, Adrian?” muttered Dorian.“Where else should I be?”
he answered, listlessly. “None of the chapswill speak to me now.”“I thought you
had left England.”“Darlington is not going to do anything. My brother paid the
bill atlast. George doesn’t speak to me either.... I don’t care,” he addedwith a
sigh. “As long as one has this stuff, one doesn’t want friends.I think I have
had too many friends.”Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things
that lay in suchfantastic postures on the ragged mattresses. The twisted limbs,
thegaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him. He knew inwhat
strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells wereteaching them the
secret of some new joy. They were better off than hewas. He was prisoned in
thought. Memory, like a horrible malady, waseating his soul away. From time to
time he seemed to see the eyes ofBasil Hallward looking at him. Yet he felt he
could not stay. Thepresence of Adrian Singleton troubled him. He wanted to be
where no onewould know who he was. He wanted to escape from himself.“I am going
on to the other place,” he said after a pause.“On the wharf?”“Yes.”“That mad-cat
is sure to be there. They won’t have her in this placenow.”Dorian shrugged his
shoulders. “I am sick of women who love one. Womenwho hate one are much more
interesting. Besides, the stuff is better.”“Much the same.”“I like it better.
Come and have something to drink. I must havesomething.”“I don’t want anything,”
murmured the young man.“Never mind.”Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and
followed Dorian to the bar. Ahalf-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster,
grinned a hideousgreeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in
front ofthem. The women sidled up and began to chatter. Dorian turned his backon
them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.A crooked smile, like
a Malay crease, writhed across the face of one ofthe women. “We are very proud
to-night,” she sneered.“For God’s sake don’t talk to me,” cried Dorian, stamping
his foot onthe ground. “What do you want? Money? Here it is. Don’t ever talk to
meagain.”Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman’s sodden eyes,
thenflickered out and left them dull and glazed. She tossed her head andraked
the coins off the counter with greedy fingers. Her companionwatched her
enviously.“It’s no use,” sighed Adrian Singleton. “I don’t care to go back.
Whatdoes it matter? I am quite happy here.”“You will write to me if you want
anything, won’t you?” said Dorian,after a pause.“Perhaps.”“Good night,
then.”“Good night,” answered the young man, passing up the steps and wipinghis
parched mouth with a handkerchief.Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain
in his face. As he drewthe curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted
lips of thewoman who had taken his money. “There goes the devil’s bargain!”
shehiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.“Curse you!” he answered, “don’t call me
that.”She snapped her fingers. “Prince Charming is what you like to becalled,
ain’t it?” she yelled after him.The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she
spoke, and looked wildlyround. The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell
on his ear. Herushed out as if in pursuit.Dorian Gray hurried along the quay
through the drizzling rain. Hismeeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved
him, and he wonderedif the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his
door, asBasil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult. He bit
hislip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad. Yet, after all, what didit
matter to him? One’s days were too brief to take the burden ofanother’s errors
on one’s shoulders. Each man lived his own life andpaid his own price for living
it. The only pity was one had to pay sooften for a single fault. One had to pay
over and over again, indeed.In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her
accounts.There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin,
orfor what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre ofthe
body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearfulimpulses. Men
and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will.They move to their
terrible end as automatons move. Choice is takenfrom them, and conscience is
either killed, or, if it lives at all,lives but to give rebellion its
fascination and disobedience its charm.For all sins, as theologians weary not of
reminding us, are sins ofdisobedience. When that high spirit, that morning star
of evil, fellfrom heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.Callous, concentrated
on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry forrebellion, Dorian Gray hastened
on, quickening his step as he went, butas he darted aside into a dim archway,
that had served him often as ashort cut to the ill-famed place where he was
going, he felt himselfsuddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to
defend himself,he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round
histhroat.He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched
thetightening fingers away. In a second he heard the click of a revolver,and saw
the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head,and the dusky form
of a short, thick-set man facing him.“What do you want?” he gasped.“Keep quiet,”
said the man. “If you stir, I shoot you.”“You are mad. What have I done to
you?”“You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane,” was the answer, “and Sibyl Vanewas my
sister. She killed herself. I know it. Her death is at yourdoor. I swore I would
kill you in return. For years I have sought you.I had no clue, no trace. The two
people who could have described youwere dead. I knew nothing of you but the pet
name she used to call you.I heard it to-night by chance. Make your peace with
God, for to-nightyou are going to die.”Dorian Gray grew sick with fear. “I never
knew her,” he stammered. “Inever heard of her. You are mad.”“You had better
confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, youare going to die.” There
was a horrible moment. Dorian did not knowwhat to say or do. “Down on your
knees!” growled the man. “I give youone minute to make your peace—no more. I go
on board to-night forIndia, and I must do my job first. One minute. That’s
all.”Dorian’s arms fell to his side. Paralysed with terror, he did not knowwhat
to do. Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain. “Stop,” hecried. “How long
ago is it since your sister died? Quick, tell me!”“Eighteen years,” said the
man. “Why do you ask me? What do yearsmatter?”“Eighteen years,” laughed Dorian
Gray, with a touch of triumph in hisvoice. “Eighteen years! Set me under the
lamp and look at my face!”James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding
what was meant.Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.Dim
and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show himthe hideous
error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the faceof the man he had
sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all theunstained purity of youth.
He seemed little more than a lad of twentysummers, hardly older, if older indeed
at all, than his sister had beenwhen they had parted so many years ago. It was
obvious that this wasnot the man who had destroyed her life.He loosened his hold
and reeled back. “My God! my God!” he cried, “andI would have murdered
you!”Dorian Gray drew a long breath. “You have been on the brink ofcommitting a
terrible crime, my man,” he said, looking at him sternly.“Let this be a warning
to you not to take vengeance into your ownhands.”“Forgive me, sir,” muttered
James Vane. “I was deceived. A chance wordI heard in that damned den set me on
the wrong track.”“You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may
get intotrouble,” said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down
thestreet.James Vane stood on the pavement in horror. He was trembling from
headto foot. After a little while, a black shadow that had been creepingalong
the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to himwith stealthy
footsteps. He felt a hand laid on his arm and lookedround with a start. It was
one of the women who had been drinking atthe bar.“Why didn’t you kill him?” she
hissed out, putting haggard face quiteclose to his. “I knew you were following
him when you rushed out fromDaly’s. You fool! You should have killed him. He has
lots of money, andhe’s as bad as bad.”“He is not the man I am looking for,” he
answered, “and I want no man’smoney. I want a man’s life. The man whose life I
want must be nearlyforty now. This one is little more than a boy. Thank God, I
have notgot his blood upon my hands.”The woman gave a bitter laugh. “Little more
than a boy!” she sneered.“Why, man, it’s nigh on eighteen years since Prince
Charming made mewhat I am.”“You lie!” cried James Vane.She raised her hand up to
heaven. “Before God I am telling the truth,”she cried.“Before God?”“Strike me
dumb if it ain’t so. He is the worst one that comes here.They say he has sold
himself to the devil for a pretty face. It’s nighon eighteen years since I met
him. He hasn’t changed much since then. Ihave, though,” she added, with a sickly
leer.“You swear this?”“I swear it,” came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth.
“But don’t giveme away to him,” she whined; “I am afraid of him. Let me have
somemoney for my night’s lodging.”He broke from her with an oath and rushed to
the corner of the street,but Dorian Gray had disappeared. When he looked back,
the woman hadvanished also.CHAPTER XVII.A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in
the conservatory at SelbyRoyal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who
with her husband,a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests. It was
tea-time,and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on
thetable lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service atwhich
the duchess was presiding. Her white hands were moving daintilyamong the cups,
and her full red lips were smiling at something thatDorian had whispered to her.
Lord Henry was lying back in a silk-drapedwicker chair, looking at them. On a
peach-coloured divan sat LadyNarborough, pretending to listen to the duke’s
description of the lastBrazilian beetle that he had added to his collection.
Three young menin elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of the
women.The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were moreexpected to
arrive on the next day.“What are you two talking about?” said Lord Henry,
strolling over tothe table and putting his cup down. “I hope Dorian has told you
aboutmy plan for rechristening everything, Gladys. It is a delightful idea.”“But
I don’t want to be rechristened, Harry,” rejoined the duchess,looking up at him
with her wonderful eyes. “I am quite satisfied withmy own name, and I am sure
Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his.”“My dear Gladys, I would not alter either
name for the world. They areboth perfect. I was thinking chiefly of flowers.
Yesterday I cut anorchid, for my button-hole. It was a marvellous spotted thing,
aseffective as the seven deadly sins. In a thoughtless moment I asked oneof the
gardeners what it was called. He told me it was a fine specimenof
_Robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind. It is a sadtruth, but we
have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things.Names are everything. I
never quarrel with actions. My one quarrel iswith words. That is the reason I
hate vulgar realism in literature. Theman who could call a spade a spade should
be compelled to use one. Itis the only thing he is fit for.”“Then what should we
call you, Harry?” she asked.“His name is Prince Paradox,” said Dorian.“I
recognize him in a flash,” exclaimed the duchess.“I won’t hear of it,” laughed
Lord Henry, sinking into a chair. “From alabel there is no escape! I refuse the
title.”“Royalties may not abdicate,” fell as a warning from pretty lips.“You
wish me to defend my throne, then?”“Yes.”“I give the truths of to-morrow.”“I
prefer the mistakes of to-day,” she answered.“You disarm me, Gladys,” he cried,
catching the wilfulness of her mood.“Of your shield, Harry, not of your
spear.”“I never tilt against beauty,” he said, with a wave of his hand.“That is
your error, Harry, believe me. You value beauty far too much.”“How can you say
that? I admit that I think that it is better to bebeautiful than to be good. But
on the other hand, no one is more readythan I am to acknowledge that it is
better to be good than to be ugly.”“Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins,
then?” cried the duchess.“What becomes of your simile about the
orchid?”“Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys. You, as a
goodTory, must not underrate them. Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadlyvirtues
have made our England what she is.”“You don’t like your country, then?” she
asked.“I live in it.”“That you may censure it the better.”“Would you have me
take the verdict of Europe on it?” he inquired.“What do they say of us?”“That
Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop.”“Is that yours, Harry?”“I
give it to you.”“I could not use it. It is too true.”“You need not be afraid.
Our countrymen never recognize a description.”“They are practical.”“They are
more cunning than practical. When they make up their ledger,they balance
stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy.”“Still, we have done great
things.”“Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys.”“We have carried their
burden.”“Only as far as the Stock Exchange.”She shook her head. “I believe in
the race,” she cried.“It represents the survival of the pushing.”“It has
development.”“Decay fascinates me more.”“What of art?” she asked.“It is a
malady.”“Love?”“An illusion.”“Religion?”“The fashionable substitute for
belief.”“You are a sceptic.”“Never! Scepticism is the beginning of faith.”“What
are you?”“To define is to limit.”“Give me a clue.”“Threads snap. You would lose
your way in the labyrinth.”“You bewilder me. Let us talk of some one else.”“Our
host is a delightful topic. Years ago he was christened PrinceCharming.”“Ah!
don’t remind me of that,” cried Dorian Gray.“Our host is rather horrid this
evening,” answered the duchess,colouring. “I believe he thinks that Monmouth
married me on purelyscientific principles as the best specimen he could find of
a modernbutterfly.”“Well, I hope he won’t stick pins into you, Duchess,” laughed
Dorian.“Oh! my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with
me.”“And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?”“For the most
trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you. Usually because Icome in at ten minutes
to nine and tell her that I must be dressed byhalf-past eight.”“How unreasonable
of her! You should give her warning.”“I daren’t, Mr. Gray. Why, she invents hats
for me. You remember theone I wore at Lady Hilstone’s garden-party? You don’t,
but it is niceof you to pretend that you do. Well, she made it out of nothing.
Allgood hats are made out of nothing.”“Like all good reputations, Gladys,”
interrupted Lord Henry. “Everyeffect that one produces gives one an enemy. To be
popular one must bea mediocrity.”“Not with women,” said the duchess, shaking her
head; “and women rulethe world. I assure you we can’t bear mediocrities. We
women, as someone says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes,
ifyou ever love at all.”“It seems to me that we never do anything else,”
murmured Dorian.“Ah! then, you never really love, Mr. Gray,” answered the
duchess withmock sadness.“My dear Gladys!” cried Lord Henry. “How can you say
that? Romancelives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an
art.Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever
loved.Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion. It
merelyintensifies it. We can have in life but one great experience at best,and
the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often aspossible.”“Even
when one has been wounded by it, Harry?” asked the duchess aftera
pause.“Especially when one has been wounded by it,” answered Lord Henry.The
duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expressionin her eyes.
“What do you say to that, Mr. Gray?” she inquired.Dorian hesitated for a moment.
Then he threw his head back and laughed.“I always agree with Harry,
Duchess.”“Even when he is wrong?”“Harry is never wrong, Duchess.”“And does his
philosophy make you happy?”“I have never searched for happiness. Who wants
happiness? I havesearched for pleasure.”“And found it, Mr. Gray?”“Often. Too
often.”The duchess sighed. “I am searching for peace,” she said, “and if Idon’t
go and dress, I shall have none this evening.”“Let me get you some orchids,
Duchess,” cried Dorian, starting to hisfeet and walking down the
conservatory.“You are flirting disgracefully with him,” said Lord Henry to
hiscousin. “You had better take care. He is very fascinating.”“If he were not,
there would be no battle.”“Greek meets Greek, then?”“I am on the side of the
Trojans. They fought for a woman.”“They were defeated.”“There are worse things
than capture,” she answered.“You gallop with a loose rein.”“Pace gives life,”
was the _riposte_.“I shall write it in my diary to-night.”“What?”“That a burnt
child loves the fire.”“I am not even singed. My wings are untouched.”“You use
them for everything, except flight.”“Courage has passed from men to women. It is
a new experience for us.”“You have a rival.”“Who?”He laughed. “Lady Narborough,”
he whispered. “She perfectly adoreshim.”“You fill me with apprehension. The
appeal to antiquity is fatal to uswho are romanticists.”“Romanticists! You have
all the methods of science.”“Men have educated us.”“But not explained
you.”“Describe us as a sex,” was her challenge.“Sphinxes without secrets.”She
looked at him, smiling. “How long Mr. Gray is!” she said. “Let usgo and help
him. I have not yet told him the colour of my frock.”“Ah! you must suit your
frock to his flowers, Gladys.”“That would be a premature surrender.”“Romantic
art begins with its climax.”“I must keep an opportunity for retreat.”“In the
Parthian manner?”“They found safety in the desert. I could not do that.”“Women
are not always allowed a choice,” he answered, but hardly had hefinished the
sentence before from the far end of the conservatory camea stifled groan,
followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall. Everybodystarted up. The duchess
stood motionless in horror. And with fear inhis eyes, Lord Henry rushed through
the flapping palms to find DorianGray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in
a deathlike swoon.He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid
upon one ofthe sofas. After a short time, he came to himself and looked round
witha dazed expression.“What has happened?” he asked. “Oh! I remember. Am I safe
here, Harry?”He began to tremble.“My dear Dorian,” answered Lord Henry, “you
merely fainted. That wasall. You must have overtired yourself. You had better
not come down todinner. I will take your place.”“No, I will come down,” he said,
struggling to his feet. “I wouldrather come down. I must not be alone.”He went
to his room and dressed. There was a wild recklessness ofgaiety in his manner as
he sat at table, but now and then a thrill ofterror ran through him when he
remembered that, pressed against thewindow of the conservatory, like a white
handkerchief, he had seen theface of James Vane watching him.CHAPTER XVIII.The
next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of thetime in his
own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yetindifferent to life itself.
The consciousness of being hunted, snared,tracked down, had begun to dominate
him. If the tapestry did buttremble in the wind, he shook. The dead leaves that
were blown againstthe leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions
and wildregrets. When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor’s facepeering
through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more tolay its hand upon
his heart.But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out
ofthe night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him. Actuallife was
chaos, but there was something terribly logical in theimagination. It was the
imagination that set remorse to dog the feet ofsin. It was the imagination that
made each crime bear its misshapenbrood. In the common world of fact the wicked
were not punished, northe good rewarded. Success was given to the strong,
failure thrust uponthe weak. That was all. Besides, had any stranger been
prowling roundthe house, he would have been seen by the servants or the keepers.
Hadany foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the gardeners would
havereported it. Yes, it had been merely fancy. Sibyl Vane’s brother hadnot come
back to kill him. He had sailed away in his ship to founder insome winter sea.
From him, at any rate, he was safe. Why, the man didnot know who he was, could
not know who he was. The mask of youth hadsaved him.And yet if it had been
merely an illusion, how terrible it was to thinkthat conscience could raise such
fearful phantoms, and give themvisible form, and make them move before one! What
sort of life wouldhis be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at
him fromsilent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his earas
he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep!As the
thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, andthe air seemed to
him to have become suddenly colder. Oh! in what awild hour of madness he had
killed his friend! How ghastly the merememory of the scene! He saw it all again.
Each hideous detail came backto him with added horror. Out of the black cave of
time, terrible andswathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin. When Lord Henry
came inat six o’clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will break.It was
not till the third day that he ventured to go out. There wassomething in the
clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning thatseemed to bring him back his
joyousness and his ardour for life. But itwas not merely the physical conditions
of environment that had causedthe change. His own nature had revolted against
the excess of anguishthat had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm.
With subtleand finely wrought temperaments it is always so. Their strong
passionsmust either bruise or bend. They either slay the man, or themselvesdie.
Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on. The loves and sorrowsthat are great
are destroyed by their own plenitude. Besides, he hadconvinced himself that he
had been the victim of a terror-strickenimagination, and looked back now on his
fears with something of pityand not a little of contempt.After breakfast, he
walked with the duchess for an hour in the gardenand then drove across the park
to join the shooting-party. The crispfrost lay like salt upon the grass. The sky
was an inverted cup of bluemetal. A thin film of ice bordered the flat,
reed-grown lake.At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir
GeoffreyClouston, the duchess’s brother, jerking two spent cartridges out ofhis
gun. He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take themare home,
made his way towards his guest through the withered brackenand rough
undergrowth.“Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?” he asked.“Not very good,
Dorian. I think most of the birds have gone to theopen. I dare say it will be
better after lunch, when we get to newground.”Dorian strolled along by his side.
The keen aromatic air, the brown andred lights that glimmered in the wood, the
hoarse cries of the beatersringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of
the guns thatfollowed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of
delightfulfreedom. He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the
highindifference of joy.Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty
yards in frontof them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs
throwing itforward, started a hare. It bolted for a thicket of alders.
SirGeoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in theanimal’s
grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and hecried out at once,
“Don’t shoot it, Geoffrey. Let it live.”“What nonsense, Dorian!” laughed his
companion, and as the hare boundedinto the thicket, he fired. There were two
cries heard, the cry of ahare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in
agony, which isworse.“Good heavens! I have hit a beater!” exclaimed Sir
Geoffrey. “What anass the man was to get in front of the guns! Stop shooting
there!” hecalled out at the top of his voice. “A man is hurt.”The head-keeper
came running up with a stick in his hand.“Where, sir? Where is he?” he shouted.
At the same time, the firingceased along the line.“Here,” answered Sir Geoffrey
angrily, hurrying towards the thicket.“Why on earth don’t you keep your men
back? Spoiled my shooting for theday.”Dorian watched them as they plunged into
the alder-clump, brushing thelithe swinging branches aside. In a few moments
they emerged, dragginga body after them into the sunlight. He turned away in
horror. Itseemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went. He heard
SirGeoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer ofthe
keeper. The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive withfaces. There
was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz ofvoices. A great
copper-breasted pheasant came beating through theboughs overhead.After a few
moments—that were to him, in his perturbed state, likeendless hours of pain—he
felt a hand laid on his shoulder. He startedand looked round.“Dorian,” said Lord
Henry, “I had better tell them that the shooting isstopped for to-day. It would
not look well to go on.”“I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry,” he answered
bitterly. “Thewhole thing is hideous and cruel. Is the man ...?”He could not
finish the sentence.“I am afraid so,” rejoined Lord Henry. “He got the whole
charge of shotin his chest. He must have died almost instantaneously. Come; let
us gohome.”They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for
nearlyfifty yards without speaking. Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry andsaid,
with a heavy sigh, “It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen.”“What is?” asked
Lord Henry. “Oh! this accident, I suppose. My dearfellow, it can’t be helped. It
was the man’s own fault. Why did he getin front of the guns? Besides, it is
nothing to us. It is ratherawkward for Geoffrey, of course. It does not do to
pepper beaters. Itmakes people think that one is a wild shot. And Geoffrey is
not; heshoots very straight. But there is no use talking about the
matter.”Dorian shook his head. “It is a bad omen, Harry. I feel as if
somethinghorrible were going to happen to some of us. To myself, perhaps,”
headded, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of pain.The elder man
laughed. “The only horrible thing in the world is_ennui_, Dorian. That is the
one sin for which there is no forgiveness.But we are not likely to suffer from
it unless these fellows keepchattering about this thing at dinner. I must tell
them that thesubject is to be tabooed. As for omens, there is no such thing as
anomen. Destiny does not send us heralds. She is too wise or too cruelfor that.
Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian? You haveeverything in the
world that a man can want. There is no one who wouldnot be delighted to change
places with you.”“There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry.
Don’tlaugh like that. I am telling you the truth. The wretched peasant whohas
just died is better off than I am. I have no terror of death. It isthe coming of
death that terrifies me. Its monstrous wings seem towheel in the leaden air
around me. Good heavens! don’t you see a manmoving behind the trees there,
watching me, waiting for me?”Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the
trembling gloved handwas pointing. “Yes,” he said, smiling, “I see the gardener
waiting foryou. I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on
thetable to-night. How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow! You mustcome
and see my doctor, when we get back to town.”Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as
he saw the gardener approaching. Theman touched his hat, glanced for a moment at
Lord Henry in a hesitatingmanner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to
his master. “HerGrace told me to wait for an answer,” he murmured.Dorian put the
letter into his pocket. “Tell her Grace that I am comingin,” he said, coldly.
The man turned round and went rapidly in thedirection of the house.“How fond
women are of doing dangerous things!” laughed Lord Henry. “Itis one of the
qualities in them that I admire most. A woman will flirtwith anybody in the
world as long as other people are looking on.”“How fond you are of saying
dangerous things, Harry! In the presentinstance, you are quite astray. I like
the duchess very much, but Idon’t love her.”“And the duchess loves you very
much, but she likes you less, so youare excellently matched.”“You are talking
scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis forscandal.”“The basis of every
scandal is an immoral certainty,” said Lord Henry,lighting a cigarette.“You
would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram.”“The world goes to
the altar of its own accord,” was the answer.“I wish I could love,” cried Dorian
Gray with a deep note of pathos inhis voice. “But I seem to have lost the
passion and forgotten thedesire. I am too much concentrated on myself. My own
personality hasbecome a burden to me. I want to escape, to go away, to forget.
It wassilly of me to come down here at all. I think I shall send a wire toHarvey
to have the yacht got ready. On a yacht one is safe.”“Safe from what, Dorian?
You are in some trouble. Why not tell me whatit is? You know I would help
you.”“I can’t tell you, Harry,” he answered sadly. “And I dare say it isonly a
fancy of mine. This unfortunate accident has upset me. I have ahorrible
presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me.”“What nonsense!”“I
hope it is, but I can’t help feeling it. Ah! here is the duchess,looking like
Artemis in a tailor-made gown. You see we have come back,Duchess.”“I have heard
all about it, Mr. Gray,” she answered. “Poor Geoffrey isterribly upset. And it
seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare.How curious!”“Yes, it was very
curious. I don’t know what made me say it. Some whim,I suppose. It looked the
loveliest of little live things. But I amsorry they told you about the man. It
is a hideous subject.”“It is an annoying subject,” broke in Lord Henry. “It has
nopsychological value at all. Now if Geoffrey had done the thing onpurpose, how
interesting he would be! I should like to know some onewho had committed a real
murder.”“How horrid of you, Harry!” cried the duchess. “Isn’t it, Mr.
Gray?Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again. He is going to faint.”Dorian drew himself up
with an effort and smiled. “It is nothing,Duchess,” he murmured; “my nerves are
dreadfully out of order. That isall. I am afraid I walked too far this morning.
I didn’t hear whatHarry said. Was it very bad? You must tell me some other time.
I thinkI must go and lie down. You will excuse me, won’t you?”They had reached
the great flight of steps that led from theconservatory on to the terrace. As
the glass door closed behind Dorian,Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess
with his slumberous eyes.“Are you very much in love with him?” he asked.She did
not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape. “Iwish I knew,” she
said at last.He shook his head. “Knowledge would be fatal. It is the
uncertaintythat charms one. A mist makes things wonderful.”“One may lose one’s
way.”“All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys.”“What is
that?”“Disillusion.”“It was my _début_ in life,” she sighed.“It came to you
crowned.”“I am tired of strawberry leaves.”“They become you.”“Only in
public.”“You would miss them,” said Lord Henry.“I will not part with a
petal.”“Monmouth has ears.”“Old age is dull of hearing.”“Has he never been
jealous?”“I wish he had been.”He glanced about as if in search of something.
“What are you lookingfor?” she inquired.“The button from your foil,” he
answered. “You have dropped it.”She laughed. “I have still the mask.”“It makes
your eyes lovelier,” was his reply.She laughed again. Her teeth showed like
white seeds in a scarletfruit.Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying
on a sofa, with terrorin every tingling fibre of his body. Life had suddenly
become toohideous a burden for him to bear. The dreadful death of the
unluckybeater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him
topre-figure death for himself also. He had nearly swooned at what LordHenry had
said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.At five o’clock he rang his bell for
his servant and gave him orders topack his things for the night-express to town,
and to have the broughamat the door by eight-thirty. He was determined not to
sleep anothernight at Selby Royal. It was an ill-omened place. Death walked
there inthe sunlight. The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.Then
he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up totown to
consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests inhis absence. As he
was putting it into the envelope, a knock came tothe door, and his valet
informed him that the head-keeper wished to seehim. He frowned and bit his lip.
“Send him in,” he muttered, after somemoments’ hesitation.As soon as the man
entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of adrawer and spread it out before
him.“I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of thismorning,
Thornton?” he said, taking up a pen.“Yes, sir,” answered the gamekeeper.“Was the
poor fellow married? Had he any people dependent on him?”asked Dorian, looking
bored. “If so, I should not like them to be leftin want, and will send them any
sum of money you may think necessary.”“We don’t know who he is, sir. That is
what I took the liberty ofcoming to you about.”“Don’t know who he is?” said
Dorian, listlessly. “What do you mean?Wasn’t he one of your men?”“No, sir. Never
saw him before. Seems like a sailor, sir.”The pen dropped from Dorian Gray’s
hand, and he felt as if his hearthad suddenly stopped beating. “A sailor?” he
cried out. “Did you say asailor?”“Yes, sir. He looks as if he had been a sort of
sailor; tattooed onboth arms, and that kind of thing.”“Was there anything found
on him?” said Dorian, leaning forward andlooking at the man with startled eyes.
“Anything that would tell hisname?”“Some money, sir—not much, and a six-shooter.
There was no name of anykind. A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. A sort
of sailor wethink.”Dorian started to his feet. A terrible hope fluttered past
him. Heclutched at it madly. “Where is the body?” he exclaimed. “Quick! I
mustsee it at once.”“It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir. The folk
don’t like tohave that sort of thing in their houses. They say a corpse brings
badluck.”“The Home Farm! Go there at once and meet me. Tell one of the grooms
tobring my horse round. No. Never mind. I’ll go to the stables myself. Itwill
save time.”In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down
thelong avenue as hard as he could go. The trees seemed to sweep past himin
spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across hispath. Once
the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him.He lashed her across
the neck with his crop. She cleft the dusky airlike an arrow. The stones flew
from her hoofs.At last he reached the Home Farm. Two men were loitering in the
yard.He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them. In
thefarthest stable a light was glimmering. Something seemed to tell himthat the
body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his handupon the latch.There
he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of adiscovery that
would either make or mar his life. Then he thrust thedoor open and entered.On a
heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a mandressed in a
coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers. A spottedhandkerchief had been placed
over the face. A coarse candle, stuck in abottle, sputtered beside it.Dorian
Gray shuddered. He felt that his could not be the hand to takethe handkerchief
away, and called out to one of the farm-servants tocome to him.“Take that thing
off the face. I wish to see it,” he said, clutching atthe door-post for
support.When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward. A cry of joybroke
from his lips. The man who had been shot in the thicket was JamesVane.He stood
there for some minutes looking at the dead body. As he rodehome, his eyes were
full of tears, for he knew he was safe.CHAPTER XIX.“There is no use your telling
me that you are going to be good,” criedLord Henry, dipping his white fingers
into a red copper bowl filledwith rose-water. “You are quite perfect. Pray,
don’t change.”Dorian Gray shook his head. “No, Harry, I have done too many
dreadfulthings in my life. I am not going to do any more. I began my goodactions
yesterday.”“Where were you yesterday?”“In the country, Harry. I was staying at a
little inn by myself.”“My dear boy,” said Lord Henry, smiling, “anybody can be
good in thecountry. There are no temptations there. That is the reason why
peoplewho live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized. Civilization is notby
any means an easy thing to attain to. There are only two ways bywhich man can
reach it. One is by being cultured, the other by beingcorrupt. Country people
have no opportunity of being either, so theystagnate.”“Culture and corruption,”
echoed Dorian. “I have known something ofboth. It seems terrible to me now that
they should ever be foundtogether. For I have a new ideal, Harry. I am going to
alter. I think Ihave altered.”“You have not yet told me what your good action
was. Or did you say youhad done more than one?” asked his companion as he
spilled into hisplate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and,
through aperforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.“I can
tell you, Harry. It is not a story I could tell to any one else.I spared
somebody. It sounds vain, but you understand what I mean. Shewas quite beautiful
and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane. I think it wasthat which first attracted me to
her. You remember Sibyl, don’t you?How long ago that seems! Well, Hetty was not
one of our own class, ofcourse. She was simply a girl in a village. But I really
loved her. Iam quite sure that I loved her. All during this wonderful May that
wehave been having, I used to run down and see her two or three times aweek.
Yesterday she met me in a little orchard. The apple-blossoms kepttumbling down
on her hair, and she was laughing. We were to have goneaway together this
morning at dawn. Suddenly I determined to leave heras flowerlike as I had found
her.”“I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrillof
real pleasure, Dorian,” interrupted Lord Henry. “But I can finishyour idyll for
you. You gave her good advice and broke her heart. Thatwas the beginning of your
reformation.”“Harry, you are horrible! You mustn’t say these dreadful
things.Hetty’s heart is not broken. Of course, she cried and all that. Butthere
is no disgrace upon her. She can live, like Perdita, in hergarden of mint and
marigold.”“And weep over a faithless Florizel,” said Lord Henry, laughing, as
heleaned back in his chair. “My dear Dorian, you have the most curiouslyboyish
moods. Do you think this girl will ever be really content nowwith any one of her
own rank? I suppose she will be married some day toa rough carter or a grinning
ploughman. Well, the fact of having metyou, and loved you, will teach her to
despise her husband, and she willbe wretched. From a moral point of view, I
cannot say that I think muchof your great renunciation. Even as a beginning, it
is poor. Besides,how do you know that Hetty isn’t floating at the present moment
in somestarlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?”“I
can’t bear this, Harry! You mock at everything, and then suggest themost serious
tragedies. I am sorry I told you now. I don’t care whatyou say to me. I know I
was right in acting as I did. Poor Hetty! As Irode past the farm this morning, I
saw her white face at the window,like a spray of jasmine. Don’t let us talk
about it any more, and don’ttry to persuade me that the first good action I have
done for years,the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever known, is
really asort of sin. I want to be better. I am going to be better. Tell
mesomething about yourself. What is going on in town? I have not been tothe club
for days.”“The people are still discussing poor Basil’s disappearance.”“I should
have thought they had got tired of that by this time,” saidDorian, pouring
himself out some wine and frowning slightly.“My dear boy, they have only been
talking about it for six weeks, andthe British public are really not equal to
the mental strain of havingmore than one topic every three months. They have
been very fortunatelately, however. They have had my own divorce-case and Alan
Campbell’ssuicide. Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an
artist.Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who leftfor
Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poorBasil, and the
French police declare that Basil never arrived in Parisat all. I suppose in
about a fortnight we shall be told that he hasbeen seen in San Francisco. It is
an odd thing, but every one whodisappears is said to be seen at San Francisco.
It must be a delightfulcity, and possess all the attractions of the next
world.”“What do you think has happened to Basil?” asked Dorian, holding up
hisBurgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he coulddiscuss the
matter so calmly.“I have not the slightest idea. If Basil chooses to hide
himself, it isno business of mine. If he is dead, I don’t want to think about
him.Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me. I hate it.”“Why?” said the
younger man wearily.“Because,” said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the
gilttrellis of an open vinaigrette box, “one can survive everythingnowadays
except that. Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in thenineteenth century
that one cannot explain away. Let us have our coffeein the music-room, Dorian.
You must play Chopin to me. The man withwhom my wife ran away played Chopin
exquisitely. Poor Victoria! I wasvery fond of her. The house is rather lonely
without her. Of course,married life is merely a habit, a bad habit. But then one
regrets theloss even of one’s worst habits. Perhaps one regrets them the
most.They are such an essential part of one’s personality.”Dorian said nothing,
but rose from the table, and passing into the nextroom, sat down to the piano
and let his fingers stray across the whiteand black ivory of the keys. After the
coffee had been brought in, hestopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said,
“Harry, did it everoccur to you that Basil was murdered?”Lord Henry yawned.
“Basil was very popular, and always wore a Waterburywatch. Why should he have
been murdered? He was not clever enough tohave enemies. Of course, he had a
wonderful genius for painting. But aman can paint like Velasquez and yet be as
dull as possible. Basil wasreally rather dull. He only interested me once, and
that was when hetold me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration for you and
that youwere the dominant motive of his art.”“I was very fond of Basil,” said
Dorian with a note of sadness in hisvoice. “But don’t people say that he was
murdered?”“Oh, some of the papers do. It does not seem to me to be at
allprobable. I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was notthe
sort of man to have gone to them. He had no curiosity. It was hischief
defect.”“What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered
Basil?”said the younger man. He watched him intently after he had spoken.“I
would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character thatdoesn’t suit
you. All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.It is not in you,
Dorian, to commit a murder. I am sorry if I hurt yourvanity by saying so, but I
assure you it is true. Crime belongsexclusively to the lower orders. I don’t
blame them in the smallestdegree. I should fancy that crime was to them what art
is to us, simplya method of procuring extraordinary sensations.”“A method of
procuring sensations? Do you think, then, that a man whohas once committed a
murder could possibly do the same crime again?Don’t tell me that.”“Oh! anything
becomes a pleasure if one does it too often,” cried LordHenry, laughing. “That
is one of the most important secrets of life. Ishould fancy, however, that
murder is always a mistake. One shouldnever do anything that one cannot talk
about after dinner. But let uspass from poor Basil. I wish I could believe that
he had come to such areally romantic end as you suggest, but I can’t. I dare say
he fellinto the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up
thescandal. Yes: I should fancy that was his end. I see him lying now onhis back
under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges floatingover him and long
weeds catching in his hair. Do you know, I don’tthink he would have done much
more good work. During the last ten yearshis painting had gone off very
much.”Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and beganto
stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumagedbird with pink
crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bambooperch. As his pointed
fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf ofcrinkled lids over black,
glasslike eyes and began to sway backwardsand forwards.“Yes,” he continued,
turning round and taking his handkerchief out ofhis pocket; “his painting had
quite gone off. It seemed to me to havelost something. It had lost an ideal.
When you and he ceased to begreat friends, he ceased to be a great artist. What
was it separatedyou? I suppose he bored you. If so, he never forgave you. It’s a
habitbores have. By the way, what has become of that wonderful portrait hedid of
you? I don’t think I have ever seen it since he finished it. Oh!I remember your
telling me years ago that you had sent it down toSelby, and that it had got
mislaid or stolen on the way. You never gotit back? What a pity! it was really a
masterpiece. I remember I wantedto buy it. I wish I had now. It belonged to
Basil’s best period. Sincethen, his work was that curious mixture of bad
painting and goodintentions that always entitles a man to be called a
representativeBritish artist. Did you advertise for it? You should.”“I forget,”
said Dorian. “I suppose I did. But I never really liked it.I am sorry I sat for
it. The memory of the thing is hateful to me. Whydo you talk of it? It used to
remind me of those curious lines in someplay—Hamlet, I think—how do they
run?—“Like the painting of a sorrow,A face without a heart.”Yes: that is what it
was like.”Lord Henry laughed. “If a man treats life artistically, his brain
ishis heart,” he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.Dorian Gray shook his head
and struck some soft chords on the piano.“‘Like the painting of a sorrow,’” he
repeated, “‘a face without aheart.’”The elder man lay back and looked at him
with half-closed eyes. “By theway, Dorian,” he said after a pause, “‘what does
it profit a man if hegain the whole world and lose—how does the quotation
run?—his ownsoul’?”The music jarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his
friend.“Why do you ask me that, Harry?”“My dear fellow,” said Lord Henry,
elevating his eyebrows in surprise,“I asked you because I thought you might be
able to give me an answer.That is all. I was going through the park last Sunday,
and close by theMarble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking
peoplelistening to some vulgar street-preacher. As I passed by, I heard theman
yelling out that question to his audience. It struck me as beingrather dramatic.
London is very rich in curious effects of that kind. Awet Sunday, an uncouth
Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sicklywhite faces under a broken roof of
dripping umbrellas, and a wonderfulphrase flung into the air by shrill
hysterical lips—it was really verygood in its way, quite a suggestion. I thought
of telling the prophetthat art had a soul, but that man had not. I am afraid,
however, hewould not have understood me.”“Don’t, Harry. The soul is a terrible
reality. It can be bought, andsold, and bartered away. It can be poisoned, or
made perfect. There isa soul in each one of us. I know it.”“Do you feel quite
sure of that, Dorian?”“Quite sure.”“Ah! then it must be an illusion. The things
one feels absolutelycertain about are never true. That is the fatality of faith,
and thelesson of romance. How grave you are! Don’t be so serious. What haveyou
or I to do with the superstitions of our age? No: we have given upour belief in
the soul. Play me something. Play me a nocturne, Dorian,and, as you play, tell
me, in a low voice, how you have kept youryouth. You must have some secret. I am
only ten years older than youare, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow. You
are really wonderful,Dorian. You have never looked more charming than you do
to-night. Youremind me of the day I saw you first. You were rather cheeky, very
shy,and absolutely extraordinary. You have changed, of course, but not
inappearance. I wish you would tell me your secret. To get back my youthI would
do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early,or be respectable.
Youth! There is nothing like it. It’s absurd to talkof the ignorance of youth.
The only people to whose opinions I listennow with any respect are people much
younger than myself. They seem infront of me. Life has revealed to them her
latest wonder. As for theaged, I always contradict the aged. I do it on
principle. If you askthem their opinion on something that happened yesterday,
they solemnlygive you the opinions current in 1820, when people wore high
stocks,believed in everything, and knew absolutely nothing. How lovely thatthing
you are playing is! I wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca,with the sea
weeping round the villa and the salt spray dashing againstthe panes? It is
marvellously romantic. What a blessing it is thatthere is one art left to us
that is not imitative! Don’t stop. I wantmusic to-night. It seems to me that you
are the young Apollo and that Iam Marsyas listening to you. I have sorrows,
Dorian, of my own, thateven you know nothing of. The tragedy of old age is not
that one isold, but that one is young. I am amazed sometimes at my own
sincerity.Ah, Dorian, how happy you are! What an exquisite life you have had!
Youhave drunk deeply of everything. You have crushed the grapes againstyour
palate. Nothing has been hidden from you. And it has all been toyou no more than
the sound of music. It has not marred you. You arestill the same.”“I am not the
same, Harry.”“Yes, you are the same. I wonder what the rest of your life will
be.Don’t spoil it by renunciations. At present you are a perfect type.Don’t make
yourself incomplete. You are quite flawless now. You neednot shake your head:
you know you are. Besides, Dorian, don’t deceiveyourself. Life is not governed
by will or intention. Life is a questionof nerves, and fibres, and slowly
built-up cells in which thought hidesitself and passion has its dreams. You may
fancy yourself safe andthink yourself strong. But a chance tone of colour in a
room or amorning sky, a particular perfume that you had once loved and
thatbrings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten poem that youhad
come across again, a cadence from a piece of music that you hadceased to play—I
tell you, Dorian, that it is on things like these thatour lives depend. Browning
writes about that somewhere; but our ownsenses will imagine them for us. There
are moments when the odour of_lilas blanc_ passes suddenly across me, and I have
to live thestrangest month of my life over again. I wish I could change
placeswith you, Dorian. The world has cried out against us both, but it
hasalways worshipped you. It always will worship you. You are the type ofwhat
the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found. I amso glad that
you have never done anything, never carved a statue, orpainted a picture, or
produced anything outside of yourself! Life hasbeen your art. You have set
yourself to music. Your days are yoursonnets.”Dorian rose up from the piano and
passed his hand through his hair.“Yes, life has been exquisite,” he murmured,
“but I am not going tohave the same life, Harry. And you must not say these
extravagantthings to me. You don’t know everything about me. I think that if
youdid, even you would turn from me. You laugh. Don’t laugh.”“Why have you
stopped playing, Dorian? Go back and give me the nocturneover again. Look at
that great, honey-coloured moon that hangs in thedusky air. She is waiting for
you to charm her, and if you play shewill come closer to the earth. You won’t?
Let us go to the club, then.It has been a charming evening, and we must end it
charmingly. There issome one at White’s who wants immensely to know you—young
Lord Poole,Bournemouth’s eldest son. He has already copied your neckties, and
hasbegged me to introduce him to you. He is quite delightful and ratherreminds
me of you.”“I hope not,” said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes. “But I am
tiredto-night, Harry. I shan’t go to the club. It is nearly eleven, and Iwant to
go to bed early.”“Do stay. You have never played so well as to-night. There
wassomething in your touch that was wonderful. It had more expression thanI had
ever heard from it before.”“It is because I am going to be good,” he answered,
smiling. “I am alittle changed already.”“You cannot change to me, Dorian,” said
Lord Henry. “You and I willalways be friends.”“Yet you poisoned me with a book
once. I should not forgive that.Harry, promise me that you will never lend that
book to any one. Itdoes harm.”“My dear boy, you are really beginning to
moralize. You will soon begoing about like the converted, and the revivalist,
warning peopleagainst all the sins of which you have grown tired. You are much
toodelightful to do that. Besides, it is no use. You and I are what weare, and
will be what we will be. As for being poisoned by a book,there is no such thing
as that. Art has no influence upon action. Itannihilates the desire to act. It
is superbly sterile. The books thatthe world calls immoral are books that show
the world its own shame.That is all. But we won’t discuss literature. Come round
to-morrow. Iam going to ride at eleven. We might go together, and I will take
youto lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome. She is a charming woman, andwants to
consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.Mind you come. Or
shall we lunch with our little duchess? She says shenever sees you now. Perhaps
you are tired of Gladys? I thought youwould be. Her clever tongue gets on one’s
nerves. Well, in any case, behere at eleven.”“Must I really come,
Harry?”“Certainly. The park is quite lovely now. I don’t think there have
beensuch lilacs since the year I met you.”“Very well. I shall be here at
eleven,” said Dorian. “Good night,Harry.” As he reached the door, he hesitated
for a moment, as if he hadsomething more to say. Then he sighed and went
out.CHAPTER XX.It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his
arm anddid not even put his silk scarf round his throat. As he strolled
home,smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him. Heheard
one of them whisper to the other, “That is Dorian Gray.” Heremembered how
pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or staredat, or talked about. He
was tired of hearing his own name now. Half thecharm of the little village where
he had been so often lately was thatno one knew who he was. He had often told
the girl whom he had lured tolove him that he was poor, and she had believed
him. He had told heronce that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and
answered thatwicked people were always very old and very ugly. What a laugh
shehad!—just like a thrush singing. And how pretty she had been in hercotton
dresses and her large hats! She knew nothing, but she hadeverything that he had
lost.When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him. He senthim
to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, andbegan to think
over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.Was it really true that
one could never change? He felt a wild longingfor the unstained purity of his
boyhood—his rose-white boyhood, as LordHenry had once called it. He knew that he
had tarnished himself, filledhis mind with corruption and given horror to his
fancy; that he hadbeen an evil influence to others, and had experienced a
terrible joy inbeing so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had
beenthe fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to shame.But
was it all irretrievable? Was there no hope for him?Ah! in what a monstrous
moment of pride and passion he had prayed thatthe portrait should bear the
burden of his days, and he keep theunsullied splendour of eternal youth! All his
failure had been due tothat. Better for him that each sin of his life had
brought its sureswift penalty along with it. There was purification in
punishment. Not“Forgive us our sins” but “Smite us for our iniquities” should be
theprayer of man to a most just God.The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry
had given to him, so manyyears ago now, was standing on the table, and the
white-limbed Cupidslaughed round it as of old. He took it up, as he had done on
that nightof horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal picture,
andwith wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished shield. Once, someone
who had terribly loved him had written to him a mad letter, endingwith these
idolatrous words: “The world is changed because you are madeof ivory and gold.
The curves of your lips rewrite history.” Thephrases came back to his memory,
and he repeated them over and over tohimself. Then he loathed his own beauty,
and flinging the mirror on thefloor, crushed it into silver splinters beneath
his heel. It was hisbeauty that had ruined him, his beauty and the youth that he
had prayedfor. But for those two things, his life might have been free
fromstain. His beauty had been to him but a mask, his youth but a mockery.What
was youth at best? A green, an unripe time, a time of shallowmoods, and sickly
thoughts. Why had he worn its livery? Youth hadspoiled him.It was better not to
think of the past. Nothing could alter that. Itwas of himself, and of his own
future, that he had to think. James Vanewas hidden in a nameless grave in Selby
churchyard. Alan Campbell hadshot himself one night in his laboratory, but had
not revealed thesecret that he had been forced to know. The excitement, such as
it was,over Basil Hallward’s disappearance would soon pass away. It wasalready
waning. He was perfectly safe there. Nor, indeed, was it thedeath of Basil
Hallward that weighed most upon his mind. It was theliving death of his own soul
that troubled him. Basil had painted theportrait that had marred his life. He
could not forgive him that. Itwas the portrait that had done everything. Basil
had said things to himthat were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with
patience. Themurder had been simply the madness of a moment. As for Alan
Campbell,his suicide had been his own act. He had chosen to do it. It wasnothing
to him.A new life! That was what he wanted. That was what he was waiting
for.Surely he had begun it already. He had spared one innocent thing, atany
rate. He would never again tempt innocence. He would be good.As he thought of
Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait inthe locked room had changed.
Surely it was not still so horrible as ithad been? Perhaps if his life became
pure, he would be able to expelevery sign of evil passion from the face. Perhaps
the signs of evil hadalready gone away. He would go and look.He took the lamp
from the table and crept upstairs. As he unbarred thedoor, a smile of joy
flitted across his strangely young-looking faceand lingered for a moment about
his lips. Yes, he would be good, andthe hideous thing that he had hidden away
would no longer be a terrorto him. He felt as if the load had been lifted from
him already.He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom,
anddragged the purple hanging from the portrait. A cry of pain andindignation
broke from him. He could see no change, save that in theeyes there was a look of
cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle ofthe hypocrite. The thing was still
loathsome—more loathsome, ifpossible, than before—and the scarlet dew that
spotted the hand seemedbrighter, and more like blood newly spilled. Then he
trembled. Had itbeen merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed? Or
thedesire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry had hinted, with his mockinglaugh?
Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do thingsfiner than we are
ourselves? Or, perhaps, all these? And why was thered stain larger than it had
been? It seemed to have crept like ahorrible disease over the wrinkled fingers.
There was blood on thepainted feet, as though the thing had dripped—blood even
on the handthat had not held the knife. Confess? Did it mean that he was
toconfess? To give himself up and be put to death? He laughed. He feltthat the
idea was monstrous. Besides, even if he did confess, who wouldbelieve him? There
was no trace of the murdered man anywhere.Everything belonging to him had been
destroyed. He himself had burnedwhat had been below-stairs. The world would
simply say that he was mad.They would shut him up if he persisted in his
story.... Yet it was hisduty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make
public atonement.There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to earth
as wellas to heaven. Nothing that he could do would cleanse him till he hadtold
his own sin. His sin? He shrugged his shoulders. The death ofBasil Hallward
seemed very little to him. He was thinking of HettyMerton. For it was an unjust
mirror, this mirror of his soul that hewas looking at. Vanity? Curiosity?
Hypocrisy? Had there been nothingmore in his renunciation than that? There had
been something more. Atleast he thought so. But who could tell? ... No. There
had been nothingmore. Through vanity he had spared her. In hypocrisy he had worn
themask of goodness. For curiosity’s sake he had tried the denial of self.He
recognized that now.But this murder—was it to dog him all his life? Was he
always to beburdened by his past? Was he really to confess? Never. There was
onlyone bit of evidence left against him. The picture itself—that wasevidence.
He would destroy it. Why had he kept it so long? Once it hadgiven him pleasure
to watch it changing and growing old. Of late he hadfelt no such pleasure. It
had kept him awake at night. When he had beenaway, he had been filled with
terror lest other eyes should look uponit. It had brought melancholy across his
passions. Its mere memory hadmarred many moments of joy. It had been like
conscience to him. Yes, ithad been conscience. He would destroy it.He looked
round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward. Hehad cleaned it many
times, till there was no stain left upon it. It wasbright, and glistened. As it
had killed the painter, so it would killthe painter’s work, and all that that
meant. It would kill the past,and when that was dead, he would be free. It would
kill this monstroussoul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at
peace. Heseized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.There was a cry
heard, and a crash. The cry was so horrible in itsagony that the frightened
servants woke and crept out of their rooms.Two gentlemen, who were passing in
the square below, stopped and lookedup at the great house. They walked on till
they met a policeman andbrought him back. The man rang the bell several times,
but there was noanswer. Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house
was alldark. After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico
andwatched.“Whose house is that, Constable?” asked the elder of the two
gentlemen.“Mr. Dorian Gray’s, sir,” answered the policeman.They looked at each
other, as they walked away, and sneered. One ofthem was Sir Henry Ashton’s
uncle.Inside, in the servants’ part of the house, the half-clad domesticswere
talking in low whispers to each other. Old Mrs. Leaf was cryingand wringing her
hands. Francis was as pale as death.After about a quarter of an hour, he got the
coachman and one of thefootmen and crept upstairs. They knocked, but there was
no reply. Theycalled out. Everything was still. Finally, after vainly trying to
forcethe door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the balcony.
Thewindows yielded easily—their bolts were old.When they entered, they found
hanging upon the wall a splendid portraitof their master as they had last seen
him, in all the wonder of hisexquisite youth and beauty. Lying on the floor was
a dead man, inevening dress, with a knife in his heart. He was withered,
wrinkled,and loathsome of visage. It was not till they had examined the
ringsthat they recognized who it was.THE END *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG
EBOOK THE PICTURE OF DORIAN GRAY *** Updated editions will replace the previous
one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not
protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright
in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special
rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to
copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe
terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project
Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook,
complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for
nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances
and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given
away—you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not
protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE
FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS
WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution
of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work
associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply
with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this
file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and
Redistributing Project Gutenberg™electronic works1.A. By reading or using any
part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read,
understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual
property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for
obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do
not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund
from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on
or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most
Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of
this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do
with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
(“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the
collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work
is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the
United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing,
performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long
asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you
will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to
electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping
this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License
whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place
where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws
in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the
United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of
thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing
or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™
work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of
any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed
all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active
links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must
appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or
distributed: This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the
Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to
check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts
not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it
is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If
you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase
“ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must
complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain
permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™
electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use
and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be
linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission
of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink
or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or
any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with
Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or
redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work,
withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1
withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™
License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any
binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the
official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no
additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting
a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull
Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge
a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any
Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that: • You pay a
royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project
Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your
applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required
to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked
as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money
paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of
receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access
to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works. • You provide, in accordance with
paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement
copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you
within 90 days of receipt of the work. • You comply with all other terms of this
agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works. 1.E.9. If you wish
to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of
works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain
permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the
manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth
in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend
considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and
proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the
ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project
Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored,
maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or
computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED
WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund”
described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a
ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to
you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU
HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL
NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover
adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a
refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to
the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical
medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or
entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a
replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically,
the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a
secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe
second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further
opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of
replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you
‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable
to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum
disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity
orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void
theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the
Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation,
anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with
this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and
distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability,
costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor
any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or
deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2.
Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is
synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by
the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new
computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and
donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to
provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project
Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can
help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a
non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The
Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax
deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s
laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at
www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project
GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot
survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission
ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely
distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The
Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and
charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance
requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork
and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit
donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of
compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not
solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation
requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations
from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International
donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning
tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws
alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for
current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of
otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate,
please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.Section 5. General Information About
Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator
of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could
befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which
are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice
is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any
particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG
searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about
Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg
LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how
tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Iliad This ebook is for the use of anyone
anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and
with almost no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or
onlineat www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,you will
have to check the laws of the country where you are locatedbefore using this
eBook.Title: The IliadAnnotator: Theodore Alois BuckleyAuthor: HomerTranslator:
Alexander PopeRelease date: July 1, 2004 [eBook #6130] Most recently updated:
April 23, 2022Language: English*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE
ILIAD ***TheIliad of HomerTranslated byAlexander Pope,With Notes and
Introductionby theRev. Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A.andFlaxman’s
Designs.1899Contents INTRODUCTION. POPE’S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER THE
ILIAD BOOK I. BOOK II. BOOK III. BOOK IV. BOOK V. BOOK VI. BOOK VII. BOOK VIII.
BOOK IX. BOOK X. BOOK XI. BOOK XII. BOOK XIII. BOOK XIV. BOOK XV. BOOK XVI. BOOK
XVII. BOOK XVIII. BOOK XIX. BOOK XX. BOOK XXI. BOOK XXII. BOOK XXIII. BOOK XXIV.
CONCLUDING NOTE.Illustrations HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE MARS MINERVA REPRESSING
THE FURY OF ACHILLES THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES THETIS
CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO
HONOUR ACHILLES VULCAN JUPITER THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL
DREAM TO AGAMEMNON NEPTUNE VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF
PARIS VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS VENUS Map, titled “GRÆCIÆ ANTIQUÆ” THE
COUNCIL OF THE GODS Map of the Plain of Troy VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND,
CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE DIOMED CASTING
HIS SPEAR AT MARS JUNO HECTOR CHIDING PARIS THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE
BOWS AND BOW CASE IRIS HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS GREEK
AMPHORA—WINE VESSELS JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS THE HOURS
TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO’S CAR THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES PLUTO THE EMBASSY TO
ACHILLES GREEK GALLEY PROSERPINE ACHILLES DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE
SPOILS OF RHESUS THE DESCENT OF DISCORD HERCULES POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR GREEK
ALTAR NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA GREEK EARRINGS SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH
OF JUPITER GREEK SHIELD BACCHUS AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS CASTOR AND POLLUX
Buckles DIANA SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA ÆSCULAPIUS
FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM THETIS ORDERING THE
NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET TRIPOD THETIS AND
EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS THETIS
BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES HERCULES THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE CENTAUR
ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS THE BATH ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL THE
FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS CERES HECTOR’S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES THE
JUDGMENT OF PARIS IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR FUNERAL OF
HECTORINTRODUCTION.Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge
is ofscepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for themost
part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the verygradual character
of our education, we must continually forget, andemancipate ourselves from,
knowledge previously acquired; we must setaside old notions and embrace fresh
ones; and, as we learn, we must bedaily unlearning something which it has cost
us no small labour andanxiety to acquire.And this difficulty attaches itself
more closely to an age in whichprogress has gained a strong ascendency over
prejudice, and in whichpersons and things are, day by day, finding their real
level, in lieuof their conventional value. The same principles which have swept
awaytraditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenuesof
sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractivesuperstitions,
are working as actively in literature as in society. Thecredulity of one writer,
or the partiality of another, finds aspowerful a touchstone and as wholesome a
chastisement in the healthyscepticism of a temperate class of antagonists, as
the dreams ofconservatism, or the impostures of pluralist sinecures in the
Church.History and tradition, whether of ancient or comparatively recenttimes,
are subjected to very different handling from that which theindulgence or
credulity of former ages could allow. Mere statements arejealously watched, and
the motives of the writer form as important aningredient in the analysis of his
history, as the facts he records.Probability is a powerful and troublesome test;
and it is by thistroublesome standard that a large portion of historical
evidence issifted. Consistency is no less pertinacious and exacting in
itsdemands. In brief, to write a history, we must know more than merefacts.
Human nature, viewed under an induction of extended experience,is the best help
to the criticism of human history. Historicalcharacters can only be estimated by
the standard which humanexperience, whether actual or traditionary, has
furnished. To formcorrect views of individuals we must regard them as forming
parts of agreat whole—we must measure them by their relation to the mass
ofbeings by whom they are surrounded, and, in contemplating the incidentsin
their lives or condition which tradition has handed down to us, wemust rather
consider the general bearing of the whole narrative, thanthe respective
probability of its details.It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the
greatest men, we knowleast, and talk most. Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere[1]
have, perhaps,contributed more to the intellectual enlightenment of mankind than
anyother three writers who could be named, and yet the history of allthree has
given rise to a boundless ocean of discussion, which has leftus little save the
option of choosing which theory or theories we willfollow. The personality of
Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing inwhich critics will allow us to believe
without controversy; but uponeverything else, even down to the authorship of
plays, there is more orless of doubt and uncertainty. Of Socrates we know as
little as thecontradictions of Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know. He was
oneof the _dramatis personæ_ in two dramas as unlike in principles as instyle.
He appears as the enunciator of opinions as different in theirtone as those of
the writers who have handed them down. When we haveread Plato _or_ Xenophon, we
think we know something of Socrates; whenwe have fairly read and examined both,
we feel convinced that we aresomething worse than ignorant.It has been an easy,
and a popular expedient, of late years, to denythe personal or real existence of
men and things whose life andcondition were too much for our belief. This
system—which has oftencomforted the religious sceptic, and substituted the
consolations ofStrauss for those of the New Testament—has been of incalculable
valueto the historical theorists of the last and present centuries. Toquestion
the existence of Alexander the Great, would be a moreexcusable act, than to
believe in that of Romulus. To deny a factrelated in Herodotus, because it is
inconsistent with a theorydeveloped from an Assyrian inscription which no two
scholars read inthe same way, is more pardonable, than to believe in the
good-naturedold king whom the elegant pen of Florian has
idealized—_NumaPompilius._Scepticism has attained its culminating point with
respect to Homer,and the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a
freepermission to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard allwritten
tradition, concerning the author or authors of the Iliad andOdyssey. What few
authorities exist on the subject, are summarilydismissed, although the arguments
appear to run in a circle. “Thiscannot be true, because it is not true; and,
that is not true, becauseit cannot be true.” Such seems to be the style, in
which testimony upontestimony, statement upon statement, is consigned to denial
andoblivion.It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer
arepartly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in whichtruth
is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review ofthe Homeric theory
in its present conditions, some notice must be takenof the treatise on the Life
of Homer which has been attributed toHerodotus.According to this document, the
city of Cumæ in Æolia, was, at anearly period, the seat of frequent immigrations
from various parts ofGreece. Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of
Ithagenes.Although poor, he married, and the result of the union was a girl
namedCritheïs. The girl was left an orphan at an early age, under
theguardianship of Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of thismaiden
that we “are indebted for so much happiness.” Homer was thefirst fruit of her
juvenile frailty, and received the name ofMelesigenes, from having been born
near the river Meles, in Bœotia,whither Critheïs had been transported in order
to save her reputation.“At this time,” continues our narrative, “there lived at
Smyrna a mannamed Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not
beingmarried, engaged Critheïs to manage his household, and spin the flax
hereceived as the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory washer
performance of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he madeproposals of
marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement,willing to adopt her son,
who, he asserted, would become a clever man,if he were carefully brought
up.”They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which naturehad
bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in everyattainment,
and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemiusdied, leaving him sole
heir to his property, and his mother soonfollowed. Melesigenes carried on his
adopted father’s school with greatsuccess, exciting the admiration not only of
the inhabitants of Smyrna,but also of the strangers whom the trade carried on
there, especiallyin the exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among
thesevisitors, one Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, whoevinced a
knowledge and intelligence rarely found in those times,persuaded Melesigenes to
close his school, and accompany him on histravels. He promised not only to pay
his expenses, but to furnish himwith a further stipend, urging, that, “While he
was yet young, it wasfitting that he should see with his own eyes the countries
and citieswhich might hereafter be the subjects of his discourses.”
Melesigenesconsented, and set out with his patron, “examining all the
curiositiesof the countries they visited, and informing himself of everything
byinterrogating those whom he met.” We may also suppose, that he wrotememoirs of
all that he deemed worthy of preservation.[2] Having setsail from Tyrrhenia and
Iberia, they reached Ithaca. Here Melesigenes,who had already suffered in his
eyes, became much worse, and Mentes,who was about to leave for Leucadia, left
him to the medicalsuperintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of
Alcinor.Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly
becameacquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards formedthe
subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that itwas here that
Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophomans make theircity the seat of that
misfortune. He then returned to Smyrna, where heapplied himself to the study of
poetry.[3]But poverty soon drove him to Cumæ. Having passed over the
Hermæanplain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of Cumæ.Here
his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship ofone Tychias, an
armourer. “And up to my time,” continued the author,“the inhabitants showed the
place where he used to sit when giving arecitation of his verses, and they
greatly honoured the spot. Here alsoa poplar grew, which they said had sprung up
ever since Melesigenesarrived”.[4]But poverty still drove him on, and he went by
way of Larissa, as beingthe most convenient road. Here, the Cumans say, he
composed an epitaphon Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with
greaterprobability, been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.[5]Arrived at Cumæ,
he frequented the _converzationes_[6] of the old men,and delighted all by the
charms of his poetry. Encouraged by thisfavourable reception, he declared that,
if they would allow him apublic maintenance, he would render their city most
gloriouslyrenowned. They avowed their willingness to support him in the
measurehe proposed, and procured him an audience in the council. Having madethe
speech, with the purport of which our author has forgotten toacquaint us, he
retired, and left them to debate respecting the answerto be given to his
proposal.The greater part of the assembly seemed favourable to the poet’sdemand,
but one man observed that “if they were to feed _Homers_, theywould be
encumbered with a multitude of useless people.” “From thiscircumstance,” says
the writer, “Melesigenes acquired the name ofHomer, for the Cumans call blind
men _Homers_.”[7] With a love ofeconomy, which shows how similar the world has
always been in itstreatment of literary men, the pension was denied, and the
poet ventedhis disappointment in a wish that Cumæa might never produce a
poetcapable of giving it renown and glory.At Phocœa, Homer was destined to
experience another literary distress.One Thestorides, who aimed at the
reputation of poetical genius, keptHomer in his own house, and allowed him a
pittance, on condition of theverses of the poet passing in his name. Having
collected sufficientpoetry to be profitable, Thestorides, like some
would-be-literarypublishers, neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and
left him.At his departure, Homer is said to have observed: “O Thestorides, ofthe
many things hidden from the knowledge of man, nothing is moreunintelligible than
the human heart.”[8]Homer continued his career of difficulty and distress, until
some Chianmerchants, struck by the similarity of the verses they heard
himrecite, acquainted him with the fact that Thestorides was pursuing
aprofitable livelihood by the recital of the very same poems. This atonce
determined him to set out for Chios. No vessel happened then to besetting sail
thither, but he found one ready to start for Erythræ, atown of Ionia, which
faces that island, and he prevailed upon theseamen to allow him to accompany
them. Having embarked, he invoked afavourable wind, and prayed that he might be
able to expose theimposture of Thestorides, who, by his breach of hospitality,
had drawndown the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.At Erythræ, Homer fortunately met
with a person who had known him inPhocœa, by whose assistance he at length,
after some difficulty,reached the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an
adventure,which we will continue in the words of our author. “Having set out
fromPithys, Homer went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that
werepasturing. The dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus(for
that was the name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran upquickly, called off
his dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For sometime he stood wondering how a
blind man should have reached such aplace alone, and what could be his design in
coming. He then went up tohim, and inquired who he was, and how he had come to
desolate placesand untrodden spots, and of what he stood in need. Homer, by
recountingto him the whole history of his misfortunes, moved him with
compassion;and he took him, and led him to his cot, and having lit a fire,
badehim sup.[9]“The dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger,
accordingto their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: OGlaucus,
my friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogstheir supper at the
doors of the hut: for so it is better, since,whilst they watch, nor thief nor
wild beast will approach the fold.Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and
marvelled at its author.Having finished supper, they banqueted[10] afresh on
conversation,Homer narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he
hadvisited.At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning,
Glaucusresolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting
withHomer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he leftHomer at
home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus,a place near the
farm, and finding his mate, he told him the wholestory respecting Homer and his
journey. He paid little attention towhat he said, and blamed Glaucus for his
stupidity in taking in andfeeding maimed and enfeebled persons. However, he bade
him bring thestranger to him.Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade
him follow him,assuring him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation
soonshowed that the stranger was a man of much cleverness and generalknowledge,
and the Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake thecharge of his
children.[11]Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from
theisland, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town ofChios
he established a school where he taught the precepts of poetry.“To this day,”
says Chandler,[12] “the most curious remaining is thatwhich has been named,
without reason, the School of Homer. It is on thecoast, at some distance from
the city, northward, and appears to havebeen an open temple of Cybele, formed on
the top of a rock. The shapeis oval, and in the centre is the image of the
goddess, the head and anarm wanting. She is represented, as usual, sitting. The
chair has alion carved on each side, and on the back. The area is bounded by a
lowrim, or seat, and about five yards over. The whole is hewn out of
themountain, is rude, indistinct, and probably of the most remoteantiquity.”So
successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerablefortune. He
married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single,the other married a
Chian.The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect thepersonages
of the poems with the history of the poet, which has alreadybeen mentioned:—“In
his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towardsMentor of
Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in hispoem as the companion
of Ulysses,[13] in return for the care taken ofhim when afflicted with
blindness. He also testifies his gratitude toPhemius, who had given him both
sustenance and instruction.”His celebrity continued to increase, and many
persons advised him tovisit Greece, whither his reputation had now extended.
Having, it issaid, made some additions to his poems calculated to please the
vanityof the Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention,[14]
hesent out for Samos. Here being recognized by a Samian, who had met withhim in
Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join incelebrating the
Apaturian festival. He recited some verses, which gavegreat satisfaction, and by
singing the Eiresione at the New Moonfestivals, he earned a subsistence,
visiting the houses of the rich,with whose children he was very popular.In the
spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios,now Ino, where he
fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that hisdeath arose from vexation, at
not having been able to unravel an enigmaproposed by some fishermen’s
children.[15]Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer
wepossess, and so broad are the evidences of its historicalworthlessness, that
it is scarcely necessary to point them out indetail. Let us now consider some of
the opinions to which apersevering, patient, and learned—but by no means
consistent—series ofinvestigations has led. In doing so, I profess to bring
forwardstatements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or probability.“Homer
appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost indoubtful obscurity,
as is the history of many of the first minds whohave done honour to humanity,
because they rose amidst darkness. Themajestic stream of his song, blessing and
fertilizing, flows like theNile, through many lands and nations; and, like the
sources of theNile, its fountains will ever remain concealed.”Such are the words
in which one of the most judicious German criticshas eloquently described the
uncertainty in which the whole of theHomeric question is involved. With no less
truth and feeling heproceeds:—“It seems here of chief importance to expect no
more than the nature ofthings makes possible. If the period of tradition in
history is theregion of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light.
Thecreations of genius always seem like miracles, because they are, forthe most
part, created far out of the reach of observation. If we werein possession of
all the historical testimonies, we never could whollyexplain the origin of the
Iliad and the Odyssey; for their origin, inall essential points, must have
remained the secret of the poet.”[16]From this criticism, which shows as much
insight into the depths ofhuman nature as into the minute wire-drawings of
scholasticinvestigation, let us pass on to the main question at issue. Was
Homeran individual?[17] or were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of aningenious
arrangement of fragments by earlier poets?Well has Landor remarked: “Some tell
us there were twenty Homers; somedeny that there was ever one. It were idle and
foolish to shake thecontents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last. We
areperpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, ourdevotion to
superior power. Of all the animals on earth we least knowwhat is good for us. My
opinion is, that what is best for us is ouradmiration of good. No man living
venerates Homer more than I do.”[18]But, greatly as we admire the generous
enthusiasm which rests contentedwith the poetry on which its best impulses had
been nurtured andfostered, without seeking to destroy the vividness of first
impressionsby minute analysis—our editorial office compels us to give
someattention to the doubts and difficulties with which the Homericquestion is
beset, and to entreat our reader, for a brief period, toprefer his judgment to
his imagination, and to condescend to drydetails.Before, however, entering into
particulars respecting the question ofthis unity of the Homeric poems, (at least
of the Iliad,) I mustexpress my sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the
followingremarks:—“We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by
thebetter, the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to itsoriginal
composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians thatits primitive
integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice toassert, that the minute
and analytical spirit of a grammarian is notthe best qualification for the
profound feeling, the comprehensiveconception of an harmonious whole. The most
exquisite anatomist may beno judge of the symmetry of the human frame: and we
would take theopinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on the proportions and general
beautyof a form, rather than that of Mr. Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.“There is
some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the linesof Pope.—“‘The
critic eye—that microscope of witSees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit,How
parts relate to parts, or they to whole,The body’s harmony, the beaming soul,Are
things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,When man’s whole frame is obvious
to a flea.’”[19]Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of
questioningthe unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave
andcautious Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,[20]the
authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by moderncritics. Longinus, in
an oft quoted passage, merely expressed anopinion touching the comparative
inferiority of the Odyssey to theIliad,[21] and, among a mass of ancient
authors, whose very names[22]it would be tedious to detail, no suspicion of the
personalnon-existence of Homer ever arose. So far, the voice of antiquity
seemsto be in favour of our early ideas on the subject; let us now see whatare
the discoveries to which more modern investigations lay claim.At the end of the
seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken onthe subject, and we find
Bentley remarking that “Homer wrote a sequelof songs and rhapsodies, to be sung
by himself, for small comings andgood cheer, at festivals and other days of
merriment. These loose songswere not collected together, in the form of an epic
poem, till aboutPeisistratus’ time, about five hundred years after.”[23]Two
French writers—Hedelin and Perrault—avowed a similar scepticism onthe subject;
but it is in the “Scienza Nuova” of Battista Vico, that wefirst meet with the
germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolfwith so much learning and
acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfiantheory that we have chiefly to deal,
and with the following boldhypothesis, which we will detail in the words of
Grote:—[24]“Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A.
Wolf,turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been
recentlypublished, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history ofthe
Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though byno means the
whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previouslyannounced by Bentley,
amongst others, that the separate constituentportions of the Iliad and Odyssey
had not been cemented together intoany compact body and unchangeable order,
until the days ofPeisistratus, in the sixth century before Christ. As a step
towardsthat conclusion, Wolf maintained that no written copies of either
poemcould be shown to have existed during the earlier times, to which
theircomposition is referred; and that without writing, neither the
perfectsymmetry of so complicated a work could have been originally conceivedby
any poet, nor, if realized by him, transmitted with assurance toposterity. The
absence of easy and convenient writing, such as must beindispensably supposed
for long manuscripts, among the early Greeks,was thus one of the points in
Wolf’s case against the primitiveintegrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch,
and other leadingopponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the other
seems tohave been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been
consideredincumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character of
theIliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from
thebeginning.“To me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by
Wolf toPeisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems,
arenowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards thatview of
the question, if it could be shown, that, in order tocontrovert it, we were
driven to the necessity of admitting longwritten poems, in the ninth century
before the Christian æra. Fewthings, in my opinion, can be more improbable; and
Mr. Payne Knight,opposed as he is to the Wolfian hypothesis, admits this no less
thanWolf himself. The traces of writing in Greece, even in the seventhcentury
before the Christian æra, are exceedingly trifling. We have noremaining
inscription earlier than the fortieth Olympiad, and the earlyinscriptions are
rude and unskilfully executed; nor can we even assureourselves whether
Archilochus, Simonidês of Amorgus, Kallinus,Tyrtæus, Xanthus, and the other
early elegiac and lyric poets,committed their compositions to writing, or at
what time the practiceof doing so became familiar. The first positive ground
which authorizesus to presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the
famousordinance of Solôn, with regard to the rhapsodies at the Panathenæa:but
for what length of time previously manuscripts had existed, we areunable to
say.“Those who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from
thebeginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon
theexisting habits of society with regard to poetry—for they admitgenerally that
the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited andheard,—but upon the supposed
necessity that there must have beenmanuscripts to ensure the preservation of the
poems—the unassistedmemory of reciters being neither sufficient nor trustworthy.
But herewe only escape a smaller difficulty by running into a greater; for
theexistence of trained bards, gifted with extraordinary memory,[25] isfar less
astonishing than that of long manuscripts, in an ageessentially non-reading and
non-writing, and when even suitableinstruments and materials for the process are
not obvious. Moreover,there is a strong positive reason for believing that the
bard was underno necessity of refreshing his memory by consulting a manuscript;
forif such had been the fact, blindness would have been a disqualificationfor
the profession, which we know that it was not, as well from theexample of
Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from that of the blind bard ofChios, in the Hymn
to the Delian Apollo, whom Thucydides, as well asthe general tenor of Grecian
legend, identifies with Homer himself. Theauthor of that hymn, be he who he may,
could never have described ablind man as attaining the utmost perfection in his
art, if he had beenconscious that the memory of the bard was only maintained by
constantreference to the manuscript in his chest.”The loss of the digamma, that
_crux_ of critics, that quicksand uponwhich even the acumen of Bentley was
shipwrecked, seems to prove beyonda doubt, that the pronunciation of the Greek
language had undergone aconsiderable change. Now it is certainly difficult to
suppose that theHomeric poems could have suffered by this change, had written
copiesbeen preserved. If Chaucer’s poetry, for instance, had not beenwritten, it
could only have come down to us in a softened form, morelike the effeminate
version of Dryden, than the rough, quaint, nobleoriginal.“At what period,”
continues Grote, “these poems, or indeed any otherGreek poems, first began to be
written, must be matter of conjecture,though there is ground for assurance that
it was before the time ofSolôn. If, in the absence of evidence, we may venture
upon naming anymore determinate period, the question at once suggests itself,
Whatwere the purposes which, in that state of society, a manuscript at itsfirst
commencement must have been intended to answer? For whom was awritten Iliad
necessary? Not for the rhapsodes; for with them it wasnot only planted in the
memory, but also interwoven with the feelings,and conceived in conjunction with
all those flexions and intonations ofvoice, pauses, and other oral artifices
which were required foremphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript could
neverreproduce. Not for the general public—they were accustomed to receiveit
with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a solemnand crowded
festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad wouldbe suitable would be
a select few; studious and curious men; a class ofreaders capable of analyzing
the complicated emotions which they hadexperienced as hearers in the crowd, and
who would, on perusing thewritten words, realize in their imaginations a
sensible portion of theimpression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the
statement mayseem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies,
andthere was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed.If we
could discover at what time such a class first began to beformed, we should be
able to make a guess at the time when the old epicpoems were first committed to
writing. Now the period which may withthe greatest probability be fixed upon as
having first witnessed theformation even of the narrowest reading class in
Greece, is the middleof the seventh century before the Christian æra (B.C. 660
to B.C.630), the age of Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simonidês ofAmorgus,
&c. I ground this supposition on the change then operated inthe character and
tendencies of Grecian poetry and music—the elegiacand the iambic measures having
been introduced as rivals to theprimitive hexameter, and poetical compositions
having been transferredfrom the epical past to the affairs of present and real
life. Such achange was important at a time when poetry was the only known mode
ofpublication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable, yet thenearest
approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking atthe old epical
treasures of the people as well as a thirst for newpoetical effect; and the men
who stood forward in it, may well beconsidered as desirous to study, and
competent to criticize, from theirown individual point of view, the written
words of the Homericrhapsodies, just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed
andeulogized the Thebaïs as the production of Homer. There seems,therefore,
ground for conjecturing that (for the use of thisnewly-formed and important, but
very narrow class), manuscripts of theHomeric poems and other old epics,—the
Thebaïs and the Cypria, as wellas the Iliad and the Odyssey,—began to be
compiled towards the middleof the seventh century (B.C. 1); and the opening of
Egypt to Greciancommerce, which took place about the same period, would
furnishincreased facilities for obtaining the requisite papyrus to write upon.A
reading class, when once formed, would doubtless slowly increase, andthe number
of manuscripts along with it; so that before the time ofSolôn, fifty years
afterwards, both readers and manuscripts, thoughstill comparatively few, might
have attained a certain recognizedauthority, and formed a tribunal of reference
against the carelessnessof individual rhapsodes.”[26]But even Peisistratus has
not been suffered to remain in possession ofthe credit, and we cannot help
feeling the force of the followingobservations—“There are several incidental
circumstances which, in our opinion,throw some suspicion over the whole history
of the Peisistratidcompilation, at least over the theory, that the Iliad was
cast into itspresent stately and harmonious form by the directions of the
Athenianruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the bright period ofGrecian
song, of which, alas! we have inherited little more than thefame, and the faint
echo, if Stesichorus, Anacreon, and Simonidês wereemployed in the noble task of
compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so muchmust have been done to arrange, to
connect, to harmonize, that it isalmost incredible, that stronger marks of
Athenian manufacture shouldnot remain. Whatever occasional anomalies may be
detected, anomalieswhich no doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language
of theHomeric age, however the irregular use of the digamma may haveperplexed
our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to havecaused as much disquiet
and distress as the fair one herself among theheroes of her age, however Mr.
Knight may have failed in reducing theHomeric language to its primitive form;
however, finally, the Atticdialect may not have assumed all its more marked and
distinguishingcharacteristics—still it is difficult to suppose that the
language,particularly in the joinings and transitions, and connecting
parts,should not more clearly betray the incongruity between the more ancientand
modern forms of expression. It is not quite in character with sucha period to
imitate an antique style, in order to piece out animperfect poem in the
character of the original, as Sir Walter Scotthas done in his continuation of
Sir Tristram.“If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of
Atheniancompilation are discoverable in the language of the poems, the
totalabsence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps no less worthy
ofobservation. In later, and it may fairly be suspected in earlier times,the
Athenians were more than ordinarily jealous of the fame of theirancestors. But,
amid all the traditions of the glories of early Greeceembodied in the Iliad, the
Athenians play a most subordinate andinsignificant part. Even the few passages
which relate to theirancestors, Mr. Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is
possible,indeed, that in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to
historicfact, that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece againstthe
rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadæ, the chieftainof Thessaly,
from his valour and the number of his forces, may havebeen the most important
ally of the Peloponnesian sovereign; thepreeminent value of the ancient poetry
on the Trojan war may thus haveforced the national feeling of the Athenians to
yield to their taste.The songs which spoke of their own great ancestor were, no
doubt, offar inferior sublimity and popularity, or, at first sight, a
Theseidwould have been much more likely to have emanated from an Atheniansynod
of compilers of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Olysseid.Could France have
given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been thehero of the Jerusalem. If,
however, the Homeric ballads, as they aresometimes called, which related the
wrath of Achilles, with all itsdireful consequences, were so far superior to the
rest of the poeticcycle, as to admit no rivalry,—it is still surprising, that
throughoutthe whole poem the callida junctura should never betray the
workmanshipof an Athenian hand, and that the national spirit of a race, who
haveat a later period not inaptly been compared to our self admiringneighbours,
the French, should submit with lofty self denial to thealmost total exclusion of
their own ancestors—or, at least, to thequestionable dignity of only having
produced a leader tolerably skilledin the military tactics of his age.”[27]To
return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, thatWolf’s objections
to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odysseyhave never been wholly got
over, we cannot help discovering that theyhave failed to enlighten us as to any
substantial point, and that thedifficulties with which the whole subject is
beset, are ratheraugmented than otherwise, if we admit his hypothesis. Nor
isLachmann’s[28] modification of his theory any better. He divides thefirst
twenty-two books of the Iliad into sixteen different songs, andtreats as
ridiculous the belief that their amalgamation into oneregular poem belongs to a
period earlier than the age of Peisistratus.This, as Grote observes, “explains
the gaps and contradictions in thenarrative, but it explains nothing else.”
Moreover, we find nocontradictions warranting this belief, and the so-called
sixteen poetsconcur in getting rid of the following leading men in the first
battleafter the secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of the
Eubœans;Tlepolemus, of the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians; Odius, of
theHalizonians; Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of these heroesagain
make their appearance, and we can but agree with Colonel Mure,that “it seems
strange that any number of independent poets should haveso harmoniously
dispensed with the services of all six in the sequel.”The discrepancy, by which
Pylæmenes, who is represented as dead in thefifth book, weeps at his son’s
funeral in the thirteenth, can only beregarded as the result of an
interpolation.Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on
thesubject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfiantheory,
and of Lachmann’s modifications with the character ofPeisistratus. But he has
also shown, and we think with equal success,that the two questions relative to
the primitive unity of these poems,or, supposing that impossible, the unison of
these parts byPeisistratus, and not before his time, are essentially distinct.
Inshort, “a man may believe the Iliad to have been put together out
ofpre-existing songs, without recognising the age of Peisistratus as theperiod
of its first compilation.” The friends or literary _employês_ ofPeisistratus
must have found an Iliad that was already ancient, and thesilence of the
Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic“recension,” goes far to prove,
that, among the numerous manuscriptsthey examined, this was either wanting, or
thought unworthy ofattention.“Moreover,” he continues, “the whole tenor of the
poems themselvesconfirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the
Iliador Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the ageof
Peisistratus—nothing which brings to our view the alterationsbrought about by
two centuries, in the Greek language, the coinedmoney, the habits of writing and
reading, the despotisms and republicangovernments, the close military array, the
improved construction ofships, the Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual
frequentation ofreligious festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of
religion, &c.,familiar to the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and
theother literary friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed tonotice,
even without design, had they then, for the first time,undertaken the task of
piecing together many self existent epics intoone large aggregate. Everything in
the two great Homeric poems, both insubstance and in language, belongs to an age
two or three centuriesearlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the interpolations
(or thosepassages which, on the best grounds, are pronounced to be such)
betrayno trace of the sixth century before Christ, and may well have beenheard
by Archilochus and Kallinus—in some cases even by Arktinus andHesiod—as genuine
Homeric matter.[29] As far as the evidences on thecase, as well internal as
external, enable us to judge, we seemwarranted in believing that the Iliad and
Odyssey were recitedsubstantially as they now stand (always allowing for
partialdivergences of text and interpolations) in 776 B.C., our firsttrustworthy
mark of Grecian time; and this ancient date, let it beadded, as it is the
best-authenticated fact, so it is also the mostimportant attribute of the
Homeric poems, considered in reference toGrecian history; for they thus afford
us an insight into theanti-historical character of the Greeks, enabling us to
trace thesubsequent forward march of the nation, and to seize
instructivecontrasts between their former and their later condition.”[30]On the
whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours ofPeisistratus were wholly of
an editorial character, although, I mustconfess, that I can lay down nothing
respecting the extent of hislabours. At the same time, so far from believing
that the compositionor primary arrangement of these poems, in their present
form, was thework of Peisistratus, I am rather persuaded that the fine taste
andelegant mind of that Athenian[31] would lead him to preserve an ancientand
traditional order of the poems, rather than to patch andre-construct them
according to a fanciful hypothesis. I will not repeatthe many discussions
respecting whether the poems were written or not,or whether the art of writing
was known in the time of their reputedauthor. Suffice it to say, that the more
we read, the less satisfied weare upon either subject.I cannot, however, help
thinking, that the story which attributes thepreservation of these poems to
Lycurgus, is little else than a versionof the same story as that of
Peisistratus, while its historicalprobability must be measured by that of many
others relating to theSpartan Confucius.I will conclude this sketch of the
Homeric theories, with an attempt,made by an ingenious friend, to unite them
into something likeconsistency. It is as follows:—“No doubt the common soldiers
of that age had, like the common sailorsof some fifty years ago, some one
qualified to ‘discourse in excellentmusic’ among them. Many of these, like those
of the negroes in theUnited States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to events
passingaround them. But what was passing around them? The grand events of
aspirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to impress themselves, as themystical
legends of former times had done, upon their memory; besideswhich, a retentive
memory was deemed a virtue of the first water, andwas cultivated accordingly in
those ancient times. Ballads at first,and down to the beginning of the war with
Troy, were merelyrecitations, with an intonation. Then followed a species of
recitative,probably with an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided
thememory considerably.“It was at this period, about four hundred years after
the war, that apoet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Mœonides, but
mostprobably the former. He saw that these ballads might be made of greatutility
to his purpose of writing a poem on the social position ofHellas, and, as a
collection, he published these lays, connecting themby a tale of his own. This
poem now exists, under the title of the‘Odyssea.’ The author, however, did not
affix his own name to the poem,which, in fact, was, great part of it, remodelled
from the archaicdialect of Crete, in which tongue the ballads were found by him.
Hetherefore called it the poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this israther a
proof of his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudgingarrangement of other
people’s ideas; for, as Grote has finely observed,arguing for the unity of
authorship, ‘a great poet might have re-castpre-existing separate songs into one
comprehensive whole; but no merearrangers or compilers would be competent to do
so.’“While employed on the wild legend of Odysseus, he met with a
ballad,recording the quarrel of Achilles and Agamemnon. His noble mind seizedthe
hint that there presented itself, and the Achilleïs[32] grew underhis hand.
Unity of design, however, caused him to publish the poemunder the same
pseudonyme as his former work: and the disjointed laysof the ancient bards were
joined together, like those relating to theCid, into a chronicle history, named
the Iliad. Melesigenes knew thatthe poem was destined to be a lasting one, and
so it has proved; but,first, the poems were destined to undergo many
vicissitudes andcorruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the
streets,assemblies, and agoras. However, Solôn first, and then Peisistratus,and
afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the poems, and restoredthe works of
Melesigenes Homeros to their original integrity in a greatmeasure.”[33]Having
thus given some general notion of the strange theories whichhave developed
themselves respecting this most interesting subject, Imust still express my
conviction as to the unity of the authorship ofthe Homeric poems. To deny that
many corruptions and interpolationsdisfigure them, and that the intrusive hand
of the poetasters may hereand there have inflicted a wound more serious than the
negligence ofthe copyist, would be an absurd and captious assumption, but it is
to ahigher criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand orenjoy
these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality oftheir one author,
be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocarieum jus fasque sit_, I feel
conscious that, while the whole weight ofhistorical evidence is against the
hypothesis which would assign thesegreat works to a plurality of authors, the
most powerful internalevidence, and that which springs from the deepest and most
immediateimpulse of the soul, also speaks eloquently to the contrary.The minutiæ
of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise.Indeed, considering the
character of some of my own books, such anattempt would be gross inconsistency.
But, while I appreciate itsimportance in a philological view, I am inclined to
set little store onits æsthetic value, especially in poetry. Three parts of
theemendations made upon poets are mere alterations, some of which, hadthey been
suggested to the author by his Mæcenas or Africanus, hewould probably have
adopted. Moreover, those who are most exact inlaying down rules of verbal
criticism and interpretation, are oftenleast competent to carry out their own
precepts. Grammarians are notpoets by profession, but may be so _per accidens_.
I do not at thismoment remember two emendations on Homer, calculated to
substantiallyimprove the poetry of a passage, although a mass of remarks,
fromHerodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history of a thousand
minutepoints, without which our Greek knowledge would be gloomy and jejune.But
it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, willexercise their
elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity. Binding down anheroic or dramatic poet
to the block upon which they have previouslydissected his words and sentences,
they proceed to use the axe and thepruning knife by wholesale, and inconsistent
in everything but theirwish to make out a case of unlawful affiliation, they cut
out bookafter book, passage after passage, till the author is reduced to
acollection of fragments, or till those, who fancied they possessed theworks of
some great man, find that they have been put off with a vilecounterfeit got up
at second hand. If we compare the theories ofKnight, Wolf, Lachmann, and others,
we shall feel better satisfied ofthe utter uncertainty of criticism than of the
apocryphal position ofHomer. One rejects what another considers the
turning-point of histheory. One cuts a supposed knot by expunging what another
wouldexplain by omitting something else.Nor is this morbid species of sagacity
by any means to be looked uponas a literary novelty. Justus Lipsius, a scholar
of no ordinary skill,seems to revel in the imaginary discovery, that the
tragediesattributed to Seneca are by _four_ different authors.[34] Now, I
willventure to assert, that these tragedies are so uniform, not only intheir
borrowed phraseology—a phraseology with which writers likeBoethius and Saxo
Grammaticus were more charmed than ourselves—in theirfreedom from real poetry,
and last, but not least, in an ultra-refinedand consistent abandonment of good
taste, that few writers of thepresent day would question the capabilities of the
same gentleman, behe Seneca or not, to produce not only these, but a great many
moreequally bad. With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin astonished the worldwith
the startling announcement that the Æneid of Virgil, and thesatires of Horace,
were literary deceptions. Now, without wishing tosay one word of disrespect
against the industry and learning—nay, therefined acuteness—which scholars, like
Wolf, have bestowed upon thissubject, I must express my fears, that many of our
modern Homerictheories will become matter for the surprise and entertainment,
ratherthan the instruction, of posterity. Nor can I help thinking, that
theliterary history of more recent times will account for many points
ofdifficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to a period soremote
from that of their first creation.I have already expressed my belief that the
labours of Peisistratuswere of a purely editorial character; and there seems no
more reasonwhy corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad
inhis day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus shouldhave given
so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others. But, afterall, the main fault
in all the Homeric theories is, that they demandtoo great a sacrifice of those
feelings to which poetry most powerfullyappeals, and which are its most fitting
judges. The ingenuity which hassought to rob us of the name and existence of
Homer, does too muchviolence to that inward emotion, which makes our whole soul
yearn withlove and admiration for the blind bard of Chios. To believe the
authorof the Iliad a mere compiler, is to degrade the powers of humaninvention;
to elevate analytical judgment at the expense of the mostennobling impulses of
the soul; and to forget the ocean in thecontemplation of a polypus. There is a
catholicity, so to speak, in thevery name of Homer. Our faith in the author of
the Iliad may be amistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us a better.While,
however, I look upon the belief in Homer as one that has natureherself for its
mainspring; while I can join with old Ennius inbelieving in Homer as the ghost,
who, like some patron saint, hoversround the bed of the poet, and even bestows
rare gifts from that wealthof imagination which a host of imitators could not
exhaust,—still I amfar from wishing to deny that the author of these great poems
found arich fund of tradition, a well-stocked mythical storehouse from whencehe
might derive both subject and embellishment. But it is one thing to_use_
existing romances in the embellishment of a poem, another topatch up the poem
itself from such materials. What consistency of styleand execution can be hoped
for from such an attempt? or, rather, whatbad taste and tedium will not be the
infallible result?A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of
otherbards, are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality. Infact,
the most original writer is still drawing upon outwardimpressions—nay, even his
own thoughts are a kind of secondary agentswhich support and feed the impulses
of imagination. But unless there besome grand pervading principle—some
invisible, yet most distinctlystamped archetypus of the great whole, a poem like
the Iliad can nevercome to the birth. Traditions the most picturesque, episodes
the mostpathetic, local associations teeming with the thoughts of gods andgreat
men, may crowd in one mighty vision, or reveal themselves in moresubstantial
forms to the mind of the poet; but, except the power tocreate a grand whole, to
which these shall be but as details andembellishments, be present, we shall have
nought but a scrap-book, aparterre filled with flowers and weeds strangling each
other in theirwild redundancy: we shall have a cento of rags and tatters, which
willrequire little acuteness to detect.Sensible as I am of the difficulty of
disproving a negative, and awareas I must be of the weighty grounds there are
for opposing my belief,it still seems to me that the Homeric question is one
that is reservedfor a higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by
natureintended to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by whichthe
greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Werefaith no
virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed ourignorance on any matter.
But we are too well taught the contrarylesson; and it seems as though our faith
should be especially triedtouching the men and the events which have wrought
most influence uponthe condition of humanity. And there is a kind of sacredness
attachedto the memory of the great and the good, which seems to bid us
repulsethe scepticism which would allegorize their existence into a
pleasingapologue, and measure the giants of intellect by an
homeopathicdynameter.Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize
our thoughtseven to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit
andwith a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeplywrapped in
admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spotswhich mere analysis can
discover. In reading an heroic poem we musttransform ourselves into heroes of
the time being, we in imaginationmust fight over the same battles, woo the same
loves, burn with thesame sense of injury, as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we
can butattain this degree of enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will
scarcelysuffice for the reading of Homer), we shall feel that the poems ofHomer
are not only the work of one writer, but of the greatest writerthat ever touched
the hearts of men by the power of song.And it was this supposed unity of
authorship which gave these poemstheir powerful influence over the minds of the
men of old. Heeren, whois evidently little disposed in favour of modern
theories, finelyobserves:—“It was Homer who formed the character of the Greek
nation. No poet hasever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his
countrymen.Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the character of
othernations; it was reserved to a poet to form that of the Greeks. This isa
feature in their character which was not wholly erased even in theperiod of
their degeneracy. When lawgivers and sages appeared inGreece, the work of the
poet had already been accomplished; and theypaid homage to his superior genius.
He held up before his nation themirror, in which they were to behold the world
of gods and heroes noless than of feeble mortals, and to behold them reflected
with purityand truth. His poems are founded on the first feeling of human
nature;on the love of children, wife, and country; on that passion
whichoutweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured forthfrom a
breast which sympathized with all the feelings of man; andtherefore they enter,
and will continue to enter, every breast whichcherishes the same sympathies. If
it is granted to his immortal spirit,from another heaven than any of which he
dreamed on earth, to look downon his race, to see the nations from the fields of
Asia to the forestsof Hercynia, performing pilgrimages to the fountain which his
magicwand caused to flow; if it is permitted to him to view the vastassemblage
of grand, of elevated, of glorious productions, which hadbeen called into being
by means of his songs; wherever his immortalspirit may reside, this alone would
suffice to complete hishappiness.”[35]Can we contemplate that ancient monument,
on which the “Apotheosis ofHomer”[36] is depictured, and not feel how much of
pleasingassociation, how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly
toour minds, is lost by the admittance of any theory but our oldtradition? The
more we read, and the more we think—think as becomes thereaders of Homer,—the
more rooted becomes the conviction that theFather of Poetry gave us this rich
inheritance, whole and entire.Whatever were the means of its preservation, let
us rather be thankfulfor the treasury of taste and eloquence thus laid open to
our use, thanseek to make it a mere centre around which to drive a series
oftheories, whose wildness is only equalled by their inconsistency witheach
other.As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are
notincluded in Pope’s translation, I will content myself with a briefaccount of
the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writerwho has done it full
justice[37]:—“This poem,” says Coleridge, “is a short mock-heroic of ancient
date.The text varies in different editions, and is obviously disturbed
andcorrupt to a great degree; it is commonly said to have been a juvenileessay
of Homer’s genius; others have attributed it to the same Pigrees,mentioned
above, and whose reputation for humour seems to have invitedthe appropriation of
any piece of ancient wit, the author of which wasuncertain; so little did the
Greeks, before the age of the Ptolemies,know or care about that department of
criticism employed in determiningthe genuineness of ancient writings. As to this
little poem being ayouthful profusion of Homer, it seems sufficient to say that
from thebeginning to the end it is a plain and palpable parody, not only of
thegeneral spirit, but of the numerous passages of the Iliad itself; andeven, if
no such intention to parody were discernible in it, theobjection would still
remain, that to suppose a work of mere burlesqueto be the primary effort of
poetry in a simple age, seems to reversethat order in the development of
national taste, which the history ofevery other people in Europe, and of many in
Asia, has almostascertained to be a law of the human mind; it is in a state of
societymuch more refined and permanent than that described in the Iliad, thatany
popularity would attend such a ridicule of war and the gods as iscontained in
this poem; and the fact of there having existed threeother poems of the same
kind attributed, for aught we can see, with asmuch reason to Homer, is a strong
inducement to believe that none ofthem were of the Homeric age. Knight infers
from the usage of the worddeltos, “writing tablet,” instead of διφθέρα, “skin,”
which, accordingto Herod. 5, 58, was the material employed by the Asiatic Greeks
forthat purpose, that this poem was another offspring of Attic ingenuity;and
generally that the familiar mention of the cock (v. 191) is astrong argument
against so ancient a date for its composition.”Having thus given a brief account
of the poems comprised in Pope’sdesign, I will now proceed to make a few remarks
on his translation,and on my own purpose in the present edition.Pope was not a
Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and hisearliest acquaintance
with the poet was through the version of Ogilby.It is not too much to say that
his whole work bears the impress of adisposition to be satisfied with the
general sense, rather than to divedeeply into the minute and delicate features
of language. Hence hiswhole work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant
paraphrase than atranslation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional
anecdotes,which prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose
classicalattainments were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but itis
probable that these examinations were the result rather of thecontradictory
versions already existing, than of a desire to make aperfect transcript of the
original. And in those days, what is calledliteral translation was less
cultivated than at present. If somethinglike the general sense could be
decorated with the easy gracefulness ofa practised poet; if the charms of
metrical cadence and a pleasingfluency could be made consistent with a fair
interpretation of thepoet’s meaning, his _words_ were less jealously sought for,
and thosewho could read so good a poem as Pope’s Iliad had fair reason to
besatisfied.It would be absurd, therefore, to test Pope’s translation by our
ownadvancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to look atit as
a most delightful work in itself,—a work which is as much a partof English
literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not be tornfrom our kindly
associations with the old Iliad, that once was our mostcherished companion, or
our most looked-for prize, merely becauseButtmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made
us so much more accurate as toἀμφικύπελλον being an adjective, and not a
substantive. Far be it fromus to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we
think of Chapman’sfine, bold, rough old English;—far be it from us to hold up
histranslation as what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can
stilldismiss Pope’s Iliad to the hands of our readers, with theconsciousness
that they must have read a very great number of booksbefore they have read its
fellow.As to the Notes accompanying the present volume, they are drawn upwithout
pretension, and mainly with the view of helping the generalreader. Having some
little time since translated all the works of Homerfor another publisher, I
might have brought a large amount ofaccumulated matter, sometimes of a critical
character, to bear upon thetext. But Pope’s version was no field for such a
display; and mypurpose was to touch briefly on antiquarian or mythological
allusions,to notice occasionally _some_ departures from the original, and to
givea few parallel passages from our English Homer, Milton. In the lattertask I
cannot pretend to novelty, but I trust that my otherannotations, while utterly
disclaiming high scholastic views, will befound to convey as much as is wanted;
at least, as far as the necessarylimits of these volumes could be expected to
admit. To write acommentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I have made
Pope’stranslation a little more entertaining and instructive to a mass
ofmiscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes
satisfactorilyaccomplished.THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY._Christ Church_.POPE’S PREFACE
TO THE ILIAD OF HOMERHomer is universally allowed to have had the greatest
invention of anywriter whatever. The praise of judgment Virgil has justly
contestedwith him, and others may have their pretensions as to
particularexcellences; but his invention remains yet unrivalled. Nor is it
awonder if he has ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who mostexcelled
in that which is the very foundation of poetry. It is theinvention that, in
different degrees, distinguishes all great geniuses:the utmost stretch of human
study, learning, and industry, whichmasters everything besides, can never attain
to this. It furnishes artwith all her materials, and without it judgment itself
can at best but“steal wisely:” for art is only like a prudent steward that lives
onmanaging the riches of nature. Whatever praises may be given to worksof
judgment, there is not even a single beauty in them to which theinvention must
not contribute: as in the most regular gardens, art canonly reduce beauties of
nature to more regularity, and such a figure,which the common eye may better
take in, and is, therefore, moreentertained with. And, perhaps, the reason why
common critics areinclined to prefer a judicious and methodical genius to a
great andfruitful one, is, because they find it easier for themselves to
pursuetheir observations through a uniform and bounded walk of art, than
tocomprehend the vast and various extent of nature.Our author’s work is a wild
paradise, where, if we cannot see all thebeauties so distinctly as in an ordered
garden, it is only because thenumber of them is infinitely greater. It is like a
copious nursery,which contains the seeds and first productions of every kind,
out ofwhich those who followed him have but selected some particular plants,each
according to his fancy, to cultivate and beautify. If some thingsare too
luxuriant it is owing to the richness of the soil; and ifothers are not arrived
to perfection or maturity, it is only becausethey are overrun and oppressed by
those of a stronger nature.It is to the strength of this amazing invention we
are to attributethat unequalled fire and rapture which is so forcible in Homer,
that noman of a true poetical spirit is master of himself while he reads
him.What he writes is of the most animated nature imaginable; every thingmoves,
every thing lives, and is put in action. If a council be called,or a battle
fought, you are not coldly informed of what was said ordone as from a third
person; the reader is hurried out of himself bythe force of the poet’s
imagination, and turns in one place to ahearer, in another to a spectator. The
course of his verses resemblesthat of the army he describes, Οἵδ’ ἄῤ ἴσαν, ὡσεί
τε πυρὶ χθὼν πἆσα νέμοιτο.“They pour along like a fire that sweeps the whole
earth before it.” Itis, however, remarkable, that his fancy, which is everywhere
vigorous,is not discovered immediately at the beginning of his poem in
itsfullest splendour: it grows in the progress both upon himself andothers, and
becomes on fire, like a chariot-wheel, by its own rapidity.Exact disposition,
just thought, correct elocution, polished numbers,may have been found in a
thousand; but this poetic fire, this “vividavis animi,” in a very few. Even in
works where all those are imperfector neglected, this can overpower criticism,
and make us admire evenwhile we disapprove. Nay, where this appears, though
attended withabsurdities, it brightens all the rubbish about it, till we see
nothingbut its own splendour. This fire is discerned in Virgil, but discernedas
through a glass, reflected from Homer, more shining than fierce, buteverywhere
equal and constant: in Lucan and Statius it bursts out insudden, short, and
interrupted flashes: In Milton it glows like afurnace kept up to an uncommon
ardour by the force of art: inShakspeare it strikes before we are aware, like an
accidental fire fromheaven: but in Homer, and in him only, it burns everywhere
clearly andeverywhere irresistibly.I shall here endeavour to show how this vast
invention exerts itself ina manner superior to that of any poet through all the
main constituentparts of his work: as it is the great and peculiar
characteristic whichdistinguishes him from all other authors.This strong and
ruling faculty was like a powerful star, which, in theviolence of its course,
drew all things within its vortex. It seemednot enough to have taken in the
whole circle of arts, and the wholecompass of nature, to supply his maxims and
reflections; all the inwardpassions and affections of mankind, to furnish his
characters: and allthe outward forms and images of things for his descriptions:
butwanting yet an ampler sphere to expatiate in, he opened a new andboundless
walk for his imagination, and created a world for himself inthe invention of
fable. That which Aristotle calls “the soul ofpoetry,” was first breathed into
it by Homer. I shall begin withconsidering him in his part, as it is naturally
the first; and I speakof it both as it means the design of a poem, and as it is
taken forfiction.Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and
themarvellous. The probable fable is the recital of such actions as,though they
did not happen, yet might, in the common course of nature;or of such as, though
they did, became fables by the additionalepisodes and manner of telling them. Of
this sort is the main story ofan epic poem, “The return of Ulysses, the
settlement of the Trojans inItaly,” or the like. That of the Iliad is the “anger
of Achilles,” themost short and single subject that ever was chosen by any poet.
Yetthis he has supplied with a vaster variety of incidents and events,
andcrowded with a greater number of councils, speeches, battles, andepisodes of
all kinds, than are to be found even in those poems whoseschemes are of the
utmost latitude and irregularity. The action ishurried on with the most vehement
spirit, and its whole durationemploys not so much as fifty days. Virgil, for
want of so warm agenius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive subject, as
well asa greater length of time, and contracting the design of both Homer’spoems
into one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his. Theother epic poets
have used the same practice, but generally carried itso far as to superinduce a
multiplicity of fables, destroy the unity ofaction, and lose their readers in an
unreasonable length of time. Noris it only in the main design that they have
been unable to add to hisinvention, but they have followed him in every episode
and part ofstory. If he has given a regular catalogue of an army, they all draw
uptheir forces in the same order. If he has funeral games for Patroclus,Virgil
has the same for Anchises, and Statius (rather than omit them)destroys the unity
of his actions for those of Archemorus. If Ulyssesvisit the shades, the Æneas of
Virgil and Scipio of Silius are sentafter him. If he be detained from his return
by the allurements ofCalypso, so is Æneas by Dido, and Rinaldo by Armida. If
Achilles beabsent from the army on the score of a quarrel through half the
poem,Rinaldo must absent himself just as long on the like account. If hegives
his hero a suit of celestial armour, Virgil and Tasso make thesame present to
theirs. Virgil has not only observed this closeimitation of Homer, but, where he
had not led the way, supplied thewant from other Greek authors. Thus the story
of Sinon, and the takingof Troy, was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for
word fromPisander, as the loves of Dido and Æneas are taken from those of
Medeaand Jason in Apollonius, and several others in the same manner.To proceed
to the allegorical fable—If we reflect upon thoseinnumerable knowledges, those
secrets of nature and physical philosophywhich Homer is generally supposed to
have wrapped up in his allegories,what a new and ample scene of wonder may this
consideration afford us!How fertile will that imagination appear, which was able
to clothe allthe properties of elements, the qualifications of the mind, the
virtuesand vices, in forms and persons, and to introduce them into
actionsagreeable to the nature of the things they shadowed! This is a field
inwhich no succeeding poets could dispute with Homer, and whatevercommendations
have been allowed them on this head, are by no means fortheir invention in
having enlarged his circle, but for their judgmentin having contracted it. For
when the mode of learning changed in thefollowing ages, and science was
delivered in a plainer manner, it thenbecame as reasonable in the more modern
poets to lay it aside, as itwas in Homer to make use of it. And perhaps it was
no unhappycircumstance for Virgil, that there was not in his time that
demandupon him of so great an invention as might be capable of furnishing
allthose allegorical parts of a poem.The marvellous fable includes whatever is
supernatural, and especiallythe machines of the gods. If Homer was not the first
who introduced thedeities (as Herodotus imagines) into the religion of Greece,
he seemsthe first who brought them into a system of machinery for poetry,
andsuch a one as makes its greatest importance and dignity: for we findthose
authors who have been offended at the literal notion of the gods,constantly
laying their accusation against Homer as the chief supportof it. But whatever
cause there might be to blame his machines in aphilosophical or religious view,
they are so perfect in the poetic,that mankind have been ever since contented to
follow them: none havebeen able to enlarge the sphere of poetry beyond the
limits he has set:every attempt of this nature has proved unsuccessful; and
after all thevarious changes of times and religions, his gods continue to this
daythe gods of poetry.We come now to the characters of his persons; and here we
shall find noauthor has ever drawn so many, with so visible and surprising
avariety, or given us such lively and affecting impressions of them.Every one
has something so singularly his own, that no painter couldhave distinguished
them more by their features, than the poet has bytheir manners. Nothing can be
more exact than the distinctions he hasobserved in the different degrees of
virtues and vices. The singlequality of courage is wonderfully diversified in
the several charactersof the Iliad. That of Achilles is furious and intractable;
that ofDiomede forward, yet listening to advice, and subject to command; thatof
Ajax is heavy and self-confiding; of Hector, active and vigilant:the courage of
Agamemnon is inspirited by love of empire and ambition;that of Menelaus mixed
with softness and tenderness for his people: wefind in Idomeneus a plain direct
soldier; in Sarpedon a gallant andgenerous one. Nor is this judicious and
astonishing diversity to befound only in the principal quality which constitutes
the main of eachcharacter, but even in the under parts of it, to which he takes
care togive a tincture of that principal one. For example: the main charactersof
Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct in this,that the
wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other natural,open, and regular.
But they have, besides, characters of courage; andthis quality also takes a
different turn in each from the difference ofhis prudence; for one in the war
depends still upon caution, the otherupon experience. It would be endless to
produce instances of thesekinds. The characters of Virgil are far from striking
us in this openmanner; they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished;
and,where they are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion tothose of
Homer. His characters of valour are much alike; even that ofTurnus seems no way
peculiar, but, as it is, in a superior degree; andwe see nothing that
differences the courage of Mnestheus from that ofSergestus, Cloanthus, or the
rest. In like manner it may be remarked ofStatius’s heroes, that an air of
impetuosity runs through them all; thesame horrid and savage courage appears in
his Capaneus, Tydeus,Hippomedon, &c. They have a parity of character, which
makes them seembrothers of one family. I believe when the reader is led into
thistract of reflection, if he will pursue it through the epic and
tragicwriters, he will be convinced how infinitely superior, in this point,the
invention of Homer was to that of all others.The speeches are to be considered
as they flow from the characters;being perfect or defective as they agree or
disagree with the manners,of those who utter them. As there is more variety of
characters in theIliad, so there is of speeches, than in any other poem.
“Everything init has manner” (as Aristotle expresses it), that is, everything
isacted or spoken. It is hardly credible, in a work of such length, howsmall a
number of lines are employed in narration. In Virgil thedramatic part is less in
proportion to the narrative, and the speechesoften consist of general
reflections or thoughts, which might beequally just in any person’s mouth upon
the same occasion. As many ofhis persons have no apparent characters, so many of
his speeches escapebeing applied and judged by the rule of propriety. We oftener
think ofthe author himself when we read Virgil, than when we are engaged
inHomer, all which are the effects of a colder invention, that interestsus less
in the action described. Homer makes us hearers, and Virgilleaves us readers.If,
in the next place, we take a view of the sentiments, the samepresiding faculty
is eminent in the sublimity and spirit of histhoughts. Longinus has given his
opinion, that it was in this partHomer principally excelled. What were alone
sufficient to prove thegrandeur and excellence of his sentiments in general, is,
that theyhave so remarkable a parity with those of the Scripture. Duport, in
hisGnomologia Homerica, has collected innumerable instances of this sort.And it
is with justice an excellent modern writer allows, that ifVirgil has not so many
thoughts that are low and vulgar, he has not somany that are sublime and noble;
and that the Roman author seldom risesinto very astonishing sentiments where he
is not fired by the Iliad.If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes,
we shall find theinvention still predominant. To what else can we ascribe that
vastcomprehension of images of every sort, where we see each circumstanceof art,
and individual of nature, summoned together by the extent andfecundity of his
imagination to which all things, in their variousviews presented themselves in
an instant, and had their impressionstaken off to perfection at a heat? Nay, he
not only gives us the fullprospects of things, but several unexpected
peculiarities and sideviews, unobserved by any painter but Homer. Nothing is so
surprising asthe descriptions of his battles, which take up no less than half
theIliad, and are supplied with so vast a variety of incidents, that noone bears
a likeness to another; such different kinds of deaths, thatno two heroes are
wounded in the same manner, and such a profusion ofnoble ideas, that every
battle rises above the last in greatness,horror, and confusion. It is certain
there is not near that number ofimages and descriptions in any epic poet, though
every one has assistedhimself with a great quantity out of him; and it is
evident of Virgilespecially, that he has scarce any comparisons which are not
drawn fromhis master.If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the
brightimagination of Homer shining out in the most enlivened forms of it.
Weacknowledge him the father of poetical diction; the first who taughtthat
“language of the gods” to men. His expression is like thecolouring of some great
masters, which discovers itself to be laid onboldly, and executed with rapidity.
It is, indeed, the strongest andmost glowing imaginable, and touched with the
greatest spirit.Aristotle had reason to say, he was the only poet who had found
out“living words;” there are in him more daring figures and metaphors thanin any
good author whatever. An arrow is “impatient” to be on the wing,a weapon
“thirsts” to drink the blood of an enemy, and the like, yethis expression is
never too big for the sense, but justly great inproportion to it. It is the
sentiment that swells and fills out thediction, which rises with it, and forms
itself about it, for in thesame degree that a thought is warmer, an expression
will be brighter,as that is more strong, this will become more perspicuous; like
glassin the furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, and refines to agreater
clearness, only as the breath within is more powerful, and theheat more
intense.To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affectedthe
compound epithets. This was a sort of composition peculiarly properto poetry,
not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assistedand filled the numbers
with greater sound and pomp, and likewiseconduced in some measure to thicken the
images. On this lastconsideration I cannot but attribute these also to the
fruitfulness ofhis invention, since (as he has managed them) they are a sort
ofsupernumerary pictures of the persons or things to which they werejoined. We
see the motion of Hector’s plumes in the epithetΚορυθαίολος, the landscape of
Mount Neritus in that of Εἰνοσίφυλλος,and so of others, which particular images
could not have been insistedupon so long as to express them in a description
(though but of asingle line) without diverting the reader too much from the
principalaction or figure. As a metaphor is a short simile, one of theseepithets
is a short description.Lastly, if we consider his versification, we shall be
sensible what ashare of praise is due to his invention in that also. He was
notsatisfied with his language as he found it settled in any one part ofGreece,
but searched through its different dialects with thisparticular view, to
beautify and perfect his numbers he consideredthese as they had a greater
mixture of vowels or consonants, andaccordingly employed them as the verse
required either a greatersmoothness or strength. What he most affected was the
Ionic, which hasa peculiar sweetness, from its never using contractions, and
from itscustom of resolving the diphthongs into two syllables, so as to makethe
words open themselves with a more spreading and sonorous fluency.With this he
mingled the Attic contractions, the broader Doric, and thefeebler Æolic, which
often rejects its aspirate, or takes off itsaccent, and completed this variety
by altering some letters with thelicence of poetry. Thus his measures, instead
of being fetters to hissense, were always in readiness to run along with the
warmth of hisrapture, and even to give a further representation of his notions,
inthe correspondence of their sounds to what they signified. Out of allthese he
has derived that harmony which makes us confess he had notonly the richest head,
but the finest ear in the world. This is sogreat a truth, that whoever will but
consult the tune of his verses,even without understanding them (with the same
sort of diligence as wedaily see practised in the case of Italian operas), will
find moresweetness, variety, and majesty of sound, than in any other language
ofpoetry. The beauty of his numbers is allowed by the critics to becopied but
faintly by Virgil himself, though they are so just as toascribe it to the nature
of the Latin tongue: indeed the Greek has someadvantages both from the natural
sound of its words, and the turn andcadence of its verse, which agree with the
genius of no other language.Virgil was very sensible of this, and used the
utmost diligence inworking up a more intractable language to whatsoever graces
it wascapable of, and, in particular, never failed to bring the sound of hisline
to a beautiful agreement with its sense. If the Grecian poet hasnot been so
frequently celebrated on this account as the Roman, theonly reason is, that
fewer critics have understood one language thanthe other. Dionysius of
Halicarnassus has pointed out many of ourauthor’s beauties in this kind, in his
treatise of the Composition ofWords. It suffices at present to observe of his
numbers, that they flowwith so much ease, as to make one imagine Homer had no
other care thanto transcribe as fast as the Muses dictated, and, at the same
time,with so much force and inspiriting vigour, that they awaken and raiseus
like the sound of a trumpet. They roll along as a plentiful river,always in
motion, and always full; while we are borne away by a tide ofverse, the most
rapid, and yet the most smooth imaginable.Thus on whatever side we contemplate
Homer, what principally strikes usis his invention. It is that which forms the
character of each part ofhis work; and accordingly we find it to have made his
fable moreextensive and copious than any other, his manners more lively
andstrongly marked, his speeches more affecting and transported, hissentiments
more warm and sublime, his images and descriptions more fulland animated, his
expression more raised and daring, and his numbersmore rapid and various. I
hope, in what has been said of Virgil, withregard to any of these heads, I have
no way derogated from hischaracter. Nothing is more absurd or endless, than the
common method ofcomparing eminent writers by an opposition of particular
passages inthem, and forming a judgment from thence of their merit upon the
whole.We ought to have a certain knowledge of the principal character
anddistinguishing excellence of each: it is in that we are to considerhim, and
in proportion to his degree in that we are to admire him. Noauthor or man ever
excelled all the world in more than one faculty; andas Homer has done this in
invention, Virgil has in judgment. Not thatwe are to think that Homer wanted
judgment, because Virgil had it in amore eminent degree; or that Virgil wanted
invention, because Homerpossessed a larger share of it; each of these great
authors had more ofboth than perhaps any man besides, and are only said to have
less incomparison with one another. Homer was the greater genius, Virgil
thebetter artist. In one we most admire the man, in the other the work.Homer
hurries and transports us with a commanding impetuosity; Virgilleads us with an
attractive majesty; Homer scatters with a generousprofusion; Virgil bestows with
a careful magnificence; Homer, like theNile, pours out his riches with a
boundless overflow; Virgil, like ariver in its banks, with a gentle and constant
stream. When we beholdtheir battles, methinks the two poets resemble the heroes
theycelebrate. Homer, boundless and resistless as Achilles, bears allbefore him,
and shines more and more as the tumult increases; Virgil,calmly daring, like
Æneas, appears undisturbed in the midst of theaction; disposes all about him,
and conquers with tranquillity. Andwhen we look upon their machines, Homer seems
like his own Jupiter inhis terrors, shaking Olympus, scattering the lightnings,
and firing theheavens: Virgil, like the same power in his benevolence,
counsellingwith the gods, laying plans for empires, and regularly ordering
hiswhole creation.But after all, it is with great parts, as with great virtues,
theynaturally border on some imperfection; and it is often hard todistinguish
exactly where the virtue ends, or the fault begins. Asprudence may sometimes
sink to suspicion, so may a great judgmentdecline to coldness; and as
magnanimity may run up to profusion orextravagance, so may a great invention to
redundancy or wildness. If welook upon Homer in this view, we shall perceive the
chief objectionsagainst him to proceed from so noble a cause as the excess of
thisfaculty.Among these we may reckon some of his marvellous fictions, upon
whichso much criticism has been spent, as surpassing all the bounds
ofprobability. Perhaps it may be with great and superior souls, as withgigantic
bodies, which, exerting themselves with unusual strength,exceed what is commonly
thought the due proportion of parts, to becomemiracles in the whole; and, like
the old heroes of that make, commitsomething near extravagance, amidst a series
of glorious and inimitableperformances. Thus Homer has his “speaking horses;”
and Virgil his“myrtles distilling blood;” where the latter has not so much
ascontrived the easy intervention of a deity to save the probability.It is owing
to the same vast invention, that his similes have beenthought too exuberant and
full of circumstances. The force of thisfaculty is seen in nothing more, than in
its inability to confineitself to that single circumstance upon which the
comparison isgrounded: it runs out into embellishments of additional images,
which,however, are so managed as not to overpower the main one. His similesare
like pictures, where the principal figure has not only itsproportion given
agreeable to the original, but is also set off withoccasional ornaments and
prospects. The same will account for hismanner of heaping a number of
comparisons together in one breath, whenhis fancy suggested to him at once so
many various and correspondentimages. The reader will easily extend this
observation to moreobjections of the same kind.If there are others which seem
rather to charge him with a defect ornarrowness of genius, than an excess of it,
those seeming defects willbe found upon examination to proceed wholly from the
nature of thetimes he lived in. Such are his grosser representations of the
gods;and the vicious and imperfect manners of his heroes; but I must herespeak a
word of the latter, as it is a point generally carried intoextremes, both by the
censurers and defenders of Homer. It must be astrange partiality to antiquity,
to think with Madame Dacier,[38] “thatthose times and manners are so much the
more excellent, as they aremore contrary to ours.” Who can be so prejudiced in
their favour as tomagnify the felicity of those ages, when a spirit of revenge
andcruelty, joined with the practice of rapine and robbery, reignedthrough the
world: when no mercy was shown but for the sake of lucre;when the greatest
princes were put to the sword, and their wives anddaughters made slaves and
concubines? On the other side, I would not beso delicate as those modern
critics, who are shocked at the servileoffices and mean employments in which we
sometimes see the heroes ofHomer engaged. There is a pleasure in taking a view
of that simplicity,in opposition to the luxury of succeeding ages: in beholding
monarchswithout their guards; princes tending their flocks, and
princessesdrawing water from the springs. When we read Homer, we ought to
reflectthat we are reading the most ancient author in the heathen world;
andthose who consider him in this light, will double their pleasure in
theperusal of him. Let them think they are growing acquainted with nationsand
people that are now no more; that they are stepping almost threethousand years
back into the remotest antiquity, and entertainingthemselves with a clear and
surprising vision of things nowhere else tobe found, the only true mirror of
that ancient world. By this meansalone their greatest obstacles will vanish; and
what usually createstheir dislike, will become a satisfaction.This consideration
may further serve to answer for the constant use ofthe same epithets to his gods
and heroes; such as the “far-dartingPhœbus,” the “blue-eyed Pallas,” the
“swift-footed Achilles,” &c.,which some have censured as impertinent, and
tediously repeated. Thoseof the gods depended upon the powers and offices then
believed tobelong to them; and had contracted a weight and veneration from
therites and solemn devotions in which they were used: they were a sort
ofattributes with which it was a matter of religion to salute them on
alloccasions, and which it was an irreverence to omit. As for the epithetsof
great men, Mons. Boileau is of opinion, that they were in the natureof surnames,
and repeated as such; for the Greeks having no namesderived from their fathers,
were obliged to add some other distinctionof each person; either naming his
parents expressly, or his place ofbirth, profession, or the like: as Alexander
the son of Philip,Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Diogenes the Cynic, &c. Homer,
therefore,complying with the custom of his country, used such
distinctiveadditions as better agreed with poetry. And, indeed, we have
somethingparallel to these in modern times, such as the names of HaroldHarefoot,
Edmund Ironside, Edward Longshanks, Edward the Black Prince,&c. If yet this be
thought to account better for the propriety than forthe repetition, I shall add
a further conjecture. Hesiod, dividing theworld into its different ages, has
placed a fourth age, between thebrazen and the iron one, of “heroes distinct
from other men; a divinerace who fought at Thebes and Troy, are called
demi-gods, and live bythe care of Jupiter in the islands of the blessed.”[39]
Now among thedivine honours which were paid them, they might have this also
incommon with the gods, not to be mentioned without the solemnity of anepithet,
and such as might be acceptable to them by celebrating theirfamilies, actions or
qualities.What other cavils have been raised against Homer, are such as
hardlydeserve a reply, but will yet be taken notice of as they occur in
thecourse of the work. Many have been occasioned by an injudiciousendeavour to
exalt Virgil; which is much the same, as if one shouldthink to raise the
superstructure by undermining the foundation: onewould imagine, by the whole
course of their parallels, that thesecritics never so much as heard of Homer’s
having written first; aconsideration which whoever compares these two poets
ought to havealways in his eye. Some accuse him for the same things which
theyoverlook or praise in the other; as when they prefer the fable andmoral of
the Æneis to those of the Iliad, for the same reasons whichmight set the Odyssey
above the Æneis; as that the hero is a wiser man,and the action of the one more
beneficial to his country than that ofthe other; or else they blame him for not
doing what he never designed;as because Achilles is not as good and perfect a
prince as Æneas, whenthe very moral of his poem required a contrary character:
it is thusthat Rapin judges in his comparison of Homer and Virgil. Others
selectthose particular passages of Homer which are not so laboured as somethat
Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole management of Scaligerin his Poetics.
Others quarrel with what they take for low and meanexpressions, sometimes
through a false delicacy and refinement, oftenerfrom an ignorance of the graces
of the original, and then triumph inthe awkwardness of their own translations:
this is the conduct ofPerrault in his Parallels. Lastly, there are others, who,
pretending toa fairer proceeding, distinguish between the personal merit of
Homer,and that of his work; but when they come to assign the causes of thegreat
reputation of the Iliad, they found it upon the ignorance of histimes, and the
prejudice of those that followed; and in pursuance ofthis principle, they make
those accidents (such as the contention ofthe cities, &c.) to be the causes of
his fame, which were in realitythe consequences of his merit. The same might as
well be said ofVirgil, or any great author whose general character will
infalliblyraise many casual additions to their reputation. This is the method
ofMons. de la Mott; who yet confesses upon the whole that in whatever ageHomer
had lived, he must have been the greatest poet of his nation, andthat he may be
said in his sense to be the master even of those whosurpassed him.In all these
objections we see nothing that contradicts his title tothe honour of the chief
invention: and as long as this (which is indeedthe characteristic of poetry
itself) remains unequalled by hisfollowers, he still continues superior to them.
A cooler judgment maycommit fewer faults, and be more approved in the eyes of
one sort ofcritics: but that warmth of fancy will carry the loudest and
mostuniversal applauses which holds the heart of a reader under thestrongest
enchantment. Homer not only appears the inventor of poetry,but excels all the
inventors of other arts, in this, that he hasswallowed up the honour of those
who succeeded him. What he has doneadmitted no increase, it only left room for
contraction or regulation.He showed all the stretch of fancy at once; and if he
has failed insome of his flights, it was but because he attempted everything. A
workof this kind seems like a mighty tree, which rises from the mostvigorous
seed, is improved with industry, flourishes, and produces thefinest fruit:
nature and art conspire to raise it; pleasure and profitjoin to make it
valuable: and they who find the justest faults, haveonly said that a few
branches which run luxuriant through a richness ofnature, might be lopped into
form to give it a more regular appearance.Having now spoken of the beauties and
defects of the original, itremains to treat of the translation, with the same
view to the chiefcharacteristic. As far as that is seen in the main parts of the
poem,such as the fable, manners, and sentiments, no translator can prejudiceit
but by wilful omissions or contractions. As it also breaks out inevery
particular image, description, and simile, whoever lessens or toomuch softens
those, takes off from this chief character. It is thefirst grand duty of an
interpreter to give his author entire andunmaimed; and for the rest, the diction
and versification only are hisproper province, since these must be his own, but
the others he is totake as he finds them.It should then be considered what
methods may afford some equivalent inour language for the graces of these in the
Greek. It is certain noliteral translation can be just to an excellent original
in a superiorlanguage: but it is a great mistake to imagine (as many have done)
thata rash paraphrase can make amends for this general defect; which is noless
in danger to lose the spirit of an ancient, by deviating into themodern manners
of expression. If there be sometimes a darkness, thereis often a light in
antiquity, which nothing better preserves than aversion almost literal. I know
no liberties one ought to take, butthose which are necessary to transfusing the
spirit of the original,and supporting the poetical style of the translation: and
I willventure to say, there have not been more men misled in former times bya
servile, dull adherence to the letter, than have been deluded in oursby a
chimerical, insolent hope of raising and improving their author.It is not to be
doubted, that the fire of the poem is what a translatorshould principally
regard, as it is most likely to expire in hismanaging: however, it is his safest
way to be content with preservingthis to his utmost in the whole, without
endeavouring to be more thanhe finds his author is, in any particular place. It
is a great secretin writing, to know when to be plain, and when poetical and
figurative;and it is what Homer will teach us, if we will but follow modestly
inhis footsteps. Where his diction is bold and lofty, let us raise oursas high
as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we ought not tobe deterred from
imitating him by the fear of incurring the censure ofa mere English critic.
Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to have beenmore commonly mistaken than the
just pitch of his style: some of histranslators having swelled into fustian in a
proud confidence of thesublime; others sunk into flatness, in a cold and
timorous notion ofsimplicity. Methinks I see these different followers of Homer,
somesweating and straining after him by violent leaps and bounds (thecertain
signs of false mettle), others slowly and servilely creeping inhis train, while
the poet himself is all the time proceeding with anunaffected and equal majesty
before them. However, of the two extremesone could sooner pardon frenzy than
frigidity; no author is to beenvied for such commendations, as he may gain by
that character ofstyle, which his friends must agree together to call
simplicity, andthe rest of the world will call dulness. There is a graceful
anddignified simplicity, as well as a bold and sordid one; which differ asmuch
from each other as the air of a plain man from that of a sloven:it is one thing
to be tricked up, and another not to be dressed at all.Simplicity is the mean
between ostentation and rusticity.This pure and noble simplicity is nowhere in
such perfection as in theScripture and our author. One may affirm, with all
respect to theinspired writings, that the Divine Spirit made use of no other
wordsbut what were intelligible and common to men at that time, and in thatpart
of the world; and, as Homer is the author nearest to those, hisstyle must of
course bear a greater resemblance to the sacred booksthan that of any other
writer. This consideration (together with whathas been observed of the parity of
some of his thoughts) may, methinks,induce a translator, on the one hand, to
give in to several of thosegeneral phrases and manners of expression, which have
attained aveneration even in our language from being used in the Old
Testament;as, on the other, to avoid those which have been appropriated to
theDivinity, and in a manner consigned to mystery and religion.For a further
preservation of this air of simplicity, a particular careshould be taken to
express with all plainness those moral sentences andproverbial speeches which
are so numerous in this poet. They havesomething venerable, and as I may say,
oracular, in that unadornedgravity and shortness with which they are delivered:
a grace whichwould be utterly lost by endeavouring to give them what we call a
moreingenious (that is, a more modern) turn in the paraphrase.Perhaps the
mixture of some Græcisms and old words after the manner ofMilton, if done
without too much affectation, might not have an illeffect in a version of this
particular work, which most of any otherseems to require a venerable, antique
cast. But certainly the use ofmodern terms of war and government, such as
“platoon, campaign, junto,”or the like, (into which some of his translators have
fallen) cannot beallowable; those only excepted without which it is impossible
to treatthe subjects in any living language.There are two peculiarities in
Homer’s diction, which are a sort ofmarks or moles by which every common eye
distinguishes him at firstsight; those who are not his greatest admirers look
upon them asdefects, and those who are, seemed pleased with them as beauties.
Ispeak of his compound epithets, and of his repetitions. Many of theformer
cannot be done literally into English without destroying thepurity of our
language. I believe such should be retained as slideeasily of themselves into an
English compound, without violence to theear or to the received rules of
composition, as well as those whichhave received a sanction from the authority
of our best poets, and arebecome familiar through their use of them; such as
“thecloud-compelling Jove,” &c. As for the rest, whenever any can be asfully and
significantly expressed in a single word as in a compoundedone, the course to be
taken is obvious.Some that cannot be so turned, as to preserve their full image
by oneor two words, may have justice done them by circumlocution; as theepithet
einosiphyllos to a mountain, would appear little or ridiculoustranslated
literally “leaf-shaking,” but affords a majestic idea in theperiphrasis: “the
lofty mountain shakes his waving woods.” Others thatadmit of different
significations, may receive an advantage from ajudicious variation, according to
the occasions on which they areintroduced. For example, the epithet of Apollo,
ἑκηβόλος or“far-shooting,” is capable of two explications; one literal, in
respectof the darts and bow, the ensigns of that god; the other allegorical,with
regard to the rays of the sun; therefore, in such places whereApollo is
represented as a god in person, I would use the formerinterpretation; and where
the effects of the sun are described, I wouldmake choice of the latter. Upon the
whole, it will be necessary toavoid that perpetual repetition of the same
epithets which we find inHomer, and which, though it might be accommodated (as
has been alreadyshown) to the ear of those times, is by no means so to ours: but
onemay wait for opportunities of placing them, where they derive anadditional
beauty from the occasions on which they are employed; and indoing this properly,
a translator may at once show his fancy and hisjudgment.As for Homer’s
repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: ofwhole narrations and
speeches, of single sentences, and of one verse orhemistitch. I hope it is not
impossible to have such a regard to these,as neither to lose so known a mark of
the author on the one hand, norto offend the reader too much on the other. The
repetition is notungraceful in those speeches, where the dignity of the speaker
rendersit a sort of insolence to alter his words; as in the messages from godsto
men, or from higher powers to inferiors in concerns of state, orwhere the
ceremonial of religion seems to require it, in the solemnforms of prayers,
oaths, or the like. In other cases, I believe thebest rule is, to be guided by
the nearness, or distance, at which therepetitions are placed in the original:
when they follow too close, onemay vary the expression; but it is a question,
whether a professedtranslator be authorized to omit any: if they be tedious, the
author isto answer for it.It only remains to speak of the versification. Homer
(as has been said)is perpetually applying the sound to the sense, and varying it
on everynew subject. This is indeed one of the most exquisite beauties ofpoetry,
and attainable by very few: I only know of Homer eminent for itin the Greek, and
Virgil in the Latin. I am sensible it is what maysometimes happen by chance,
when a writer is warm, and fully possessedof his image: however, it may
reasonably be believed they designedthis, in whose verse it so manifestly
appears in a superior degree toall others. Few readers have the ear to be judges
of it: but those whohave, will see I have endeavoured at this beauty.Upon the
whole, I must confess myself utterly incapable of doingjustice to Homer. I
attempt him in no other hope but that which one mayentertain without much
vanity, of giving a more tolerable copy of himthan any entire translation in
verse has yet done. We have only thoseof Chapman, Hobbes, and Ogilby. Chapman
has taken the advantage of animmeasurable length of verse, notwithstanding
which, there is scarceany paraphrase more loose and rambling than his. He has
frequentinterpolations of four or six lines; and I remember one in thethirteenth
book of the Odyssey, ver. 312, where he has spun twentyverses out of two. He is
often mistaken in so bold a manner, that onemight think he deviated on purpose,
if he did not in other places ofhis notes insist so much upon verbal trifles. He
appears to have had astrong affectation of extracting new meanings out of his
author;insomuch as to promise, in his rhyming preface, a poem of the mysterieshe
had revealed in Homer; and perhaps he endeavoured to strain theobvious sense to
this end. His expression is involved in fustian; afault for which he was
remarkable in his original writings, as in thetragedy of Bussy d’Amboise, &c. In
a word, the nature of the man mayaccount for his whole performance; for he
appears, from his preface andremarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an
enthusiast in poetry.His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less
than fifteenweeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed. But
thatwhich is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to coverhis
defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation,which is
something like what one might imagine Homer himself would havewrit before he
arrived at years of discretion.Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the
sense in general; butfor particulars and circumstances he continually lops them,
and oftenomits the most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a closetranslation,
I doubt not many have been led into that error by theshortness of it, which
proceeds not from his following the originalline by line, but from the
contractions above mentioned. He sometimesomits whole similes and sentences; and
is now and then guilty ofmistakes, into which no writer of his learning could
have fallen, butthrough carelessness. His poetry, as well as Ogilby’s, is too
mean forcriticism.It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr. Dryden did
not liveto translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first book, and a
smallpart of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not trulyinterpreted
the sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to beexcused on account of the
haste he was obliged to write in. He seems tohave had too much regard to
Chapman, whose words he sometimes copies,and has unhappily followed him in
passages where he wanders from theoriginal. However, had he translated the whole
work, I would no morehave attempted Homer after him than Virgil: his version of
whom(notwithstanding some human errors) is the most noble and
spiritedtranslation I know in any language. But the fate of great geniuses
islike that of great ministers: though they are confessedly the first inthe
commonwealth of letters, they must be envied and calumniated onlyfor being at
the head of it.That which, in my opinion, ought to be the endeavour of any one
whotranslates Homer, is above all things to keep alive that spirit andfire which
makes his chief character: in particular places, where thesense can bear any
doubt, to follow the strongest and most poetical, asmost agreeing with that
character; to copy him in all the variations ofhis style, and the different
modulations of his numbers; to preserve,in the more active or descriptive parts,
a warmth and elevation; in themore sedate or narrative, a plainness and
solemnity; in the speeches, afulness and perspicuity; in the sentences, a
shortness and gravity; notto neglect even the little figures and turns on the
words, norsometimes the very cast of the periods; neither to omit nor
confoundany rites or customs of antiquity: perhaps too he ought to include
thewhole in a shorter compass than has hitherto been done by anytranslator who
has tolerably preserved either the sense or poetry. WhatI would further
recommend to him is, to study his author rather fromhis own text, than from any
commentaries, how learned soever, orwhatever figure they may make in the
estimation of the world; toconsider him attentively in comparison with Virgil
above all theancients, and with Milton above all the moderns. Next these,
theArchbishop of Cambray’s Telemachus may give him the truest idea of thespirit
and turn of our author; and Bossu’s admirable Treatise of theEpic Poem the
justest notion of his design and conduct. But after all,with whatever judgment
and study a man may proceed, or with whateverhappiness he may perform such a
work, he must hope to please but a few;those only who have at once a taste of
poetry, and competent learning.For to satisfy such a want either, is not in the
nature of thisundertaking; since a mere modern wit can like nothing that is
notmodern, and a pedant nothing that is not Greek.What I have done is submitted
to the public; from whose opinions I amprepared to learn; though I fear no
judges so little as our best poets,who are most sensible of the weight of this
task. As for the worst,whatever they shall please to say, they may give me some
concern asthey are unhappy men, but none as they are malignant writers. I
wasguided in this translation by judgments very different from theirs, andby
persons for whom they can have no kindness, if an old observation betrue, that
the strongest antipathy in the world is that of fools to menof wit. Mr. Addison
was the first whose advice determined me toundertake this task; who was pleased
to write to me upon that occasionin such terms as I cannot repeat without
vanity. I was obliged to SirRichard Steele for a very early recommendation of my
undertaking to thepublic. Dr. Swift promoted my interest with that warmth with
which healways serves his friend. The humanity and frankness of Sir SamuelGarth
are what I never knew wanting on any occasion. I must alsoacknowledge, with
infinite pleasure, the many friendly offices, as wellas sincere criticisms, of
Mr. Congreve, who had led me the way intranslating some parts of Homer. I must
add the names of Mr. Rowe, andDr. Parnell, though I shall take a further
opportunity of doing justiceto the last, whose good nature (to give it a great
panegyric), is noless extensive than his learning. The favour of these gentlemen
is notentirely undeserved by one who bears them so true an affection. Butwhat
can I say of the honour so many of the great have done me; whilethe first names
of the age appear as my subscribers, and the mostdistinguished patrons and
ornaments of learning as my chiefencouragers? Among these it is a particular
pleasure to me to find,that my highest obligations are to such who have done
most honour tothe name of poet: that his grace the Duke of Buckingham was
notdispleased I should undertake the author to whom he has given (in
hisexcellent Essay), so complete a praise:“Read Homer once, and you can read no
more;For all books else appear so mean, so poor,Verse will seem prose: but still
persist to read,And Homer will be all the books you need.”That the Earl of
Halifax was one of the first to favour me; of whom itis hard to say whether the
advancement of the polite arts is more owingto his generosity or his example:
that such a genius as my LordBolingbroke, not more distinguished in the great
scenes of business,than in all the useful and entertaining parts of learning,
has notrefused to be the critic of these sheets, and the patron of theirwriter:
and that the noble author of the tragedy of “Heroic Love” hascontinued his
partiality to me, from my writing pastorals to myattempting the Iliad. I cannot
deny myself the pride of confessing,that I have had the advantage not only of
their advice for the conductin general, but their correction of several
particulars of thistranslation.I could say a great deal of the pleasure of being
distinguished by theEarl of Carnarvon; but it is almost absurd to particularize
any onegenerous action in a person whose whole life is a continued series
ofthem. Mr. Stanhope, the present secretary of state, will pardon mydesire of
having it known that he was pleased to promote this affair.The particular zeal
of Mr. Harcourt (the son of the late LordChancellor) gave me a proof how much I
am honoured in a share of hisfriendship. I must attribute to the same motive
that of several othersof my friends: to whom all acknowledgments are rendered
unnecessary bythe privileges of a familiar correspondence; and I am satisfied I
canno way better oblige men of their turn than by my silence.In short, I have
found more patrons than ever Homer wanted. He wouldhave thought himself happy to
have met the same favour at Athens thathas been shown me by its learned rival,
the University of Oxford. And Ican hardly envy him those pompous honours he
received after death, whenI reflect on the enjoyment of so many agreeable
obligations, and easyfriendships, which make the satisfaction of life. This
distinction isthe more to be acknowledged, as it is shown to one whose pen has
nevergratified the prejudices of particular parties, or the vanities
ofparticular men. Whatever the success may prove, I shall never repent ofan
undertaking in which I have experienced the candour and friendshipof so many
persons of merit; and in which I hope to pass some of thoseyears of youth that
are generally lost in a circle of follies, after amanner neither wholly unuseful
to others, nor disagreeable to myself.THE ILIAD.BOOK I.ARGUMENT.[40]THE
CONTENTION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.In the war of Troy, the Greeks having
sacked some of the neighbouringtowns, and taken from thence two beautiful
captives, Chryseïs andBriseïs, allotted the first to Agamemnon, and the last to
Achilles.Chryses, the father of Chryseïs, and priest of Apollo, comes to
theGrecian camp to ransom her; with which the action of the poem opens, inthe
tenth year of the siege. The priest being refused, and insolentlydismissed by
Agamemnon, entreats for vengeance from his god; whoinflicts a pestilence on the
Greeks. Achilles calls a council, andencourages Chalcas to declare the cause of
it; who attributes it to therefusal of Chryseïs. The king, being obliged to send
back his captive,enters into a furious contest with Achilles, which Nestor
pacifies;however, as he had the absolute command of the army, he seizes
onBriseïs in revenge. Achilles in discontent withdraws himself and hisforces
from the rest of the Greeks; and complaining to Thetis, shesupplicates Jupiter
to render them sensible of the wrong done to herson, by giving victory to the
Trojans. Jupiter, granting her suit,incenses Juno: between whom the debate runs
high, till they arereconciled by the address of Vulcan. The time of
two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nine during the plague, one in the
council and quarrel of the princes, and twelve for Jupiter’s stay with the
Æthiopians, at whose return Thetis prefers her petition. The scene lies in the
Grecian camp, then changes to Chrysa, and lastly to Olympus.Achilles’ wrath, to
Greece the direful springOf woes unnumber’d, heavenly goddess, sing!That wrath
which hurl’d to Pluto’s gloomy reignThe souls of mighty chiefs untimely
slain;Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,Devouring dogs and hungry vultures
tore.[41]Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,Such was the sovereign doom,
and such the will of Jove![42]Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour[43]Sprung
the fierce strife, from what offended powerLatona’s son a dire contagion
spread,[44]And heap’d the camp with mountains of the dead;The king of men his
reverent priest defied,[45]And for the king’s offence the people died.For
Chryses sought with costly gifts to gainHis captive daughter from the victor’s
chain.Suppliant the venerable father stands;Apollo’s awful ensigns grace his
hands:By these he begs; and lowly bending down,Extends the sceptre and the
laurel crown.He sued to all, but chief implored for graceThe brother-kings, of
Atreus’ royal race[46]“Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown’d,And
Troy’s proud walls lie level with the ground.May Jove restore you when your
toils are o’erSafe to the pleasures of your native shore.But, oh! relieve a
wretched parent’s pain,And give Chryseïs to these arms again;If mercy fail, yet
let my presents move,And dread avenging Phœbus, son of Jove.”The Greeks in
shouts their joint assent declare,The priest to reverence, and release the
fair.Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride,Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus
replied:“Hence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains,Nor ask, presumptuous,
what the king detains:Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,Nor trust too
far those ensigns of thy god.Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain;And
prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain;Till time shall rifle every
youthful grace,And age dismiss her from my cold embrace,In daily labours of the
loom employ’d,Or doom’d to deck the bed she once enjoy’d.Hence then; to Argos
shall the maid retire,Far from her native soil and weeping sire.”[Illustration:
] HOMER INVOKING THE MUSEThe trembling priest along the shore return’d,And in
the anguish of a father mourn’d.Disconsolate, not daring to complain,Silent he
wander’d by the sounding main;Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays,The
god who darts around the world his rays.“O Smintheus! sprung from fair Latona’s
line,[47]Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,[48]Thou source of light! whom
Tenedos adores,And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysa’s shores.If e’er with
wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,[49]Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain;God
of the silver bow! thy shafts employ,Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks
destroy.”Thus Chryses pray’d:—the favouring power attends,And from Olympus’
lofty tops descends.Bent was his bow, the Grecian hearts to wound;[50]Fierce as
he moved, his silver shafts resound.Breathing revenge, a sudden night he
spread,And gloomy darkness roll’d about his head.The fleet in view, he twang’d
his deadly bow,And hissing fly the feather’d fates below.On mules and dogs the
infection first began;[51]And last, the vengeful arrows fix’d in man.For nine
long nights, through all the dusky air,The pyres, thick-flaming, shot a dismal
glare.But ere the tenth revolving day was run,Inspired by Juno, Thetis’ godlike
sonConvened to council all the Grecian train;For much the goddess mourn’d her
heroes slain.[52]The assembly seated, rising o’er the rest,Achilles thus the
king of men address’d:“Why leave we not the fatal Trojan shore,And measure back
the seas we cross’d before?The plague destroying whom the sword would spare,’Tis
time to save the few remains of war.But let some prophet, or some sacred
sage,Explore the cause of great Apollo’s rage;Or learn the wasteful vengeance to
removeBy mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.[53]If broken vows this
heavy curse have laid,Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.So Heaven, atoned,
shall dying Greece restore,And Phœbus dart his burning shafts no more.”He said,
and sat: when Chalcas thus replied;Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and
guide,That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,The past, the present, and the
future knew:Uprising slow, the venerable sageThus spoke the prudence and the
fears of age:“Beloved of Jove, Achilles! would’st thou knowWhy angry Phœbus
bends his fatal bow?First give thy faith, and plight a prince’s wordOf sure
protection, by thy power and sword:For I must speak what wisdom would
conceal,And truths, invidious to the great, reveal,Bold is the task, when
subjects, grown too wise,Instruct a monarch where his error lies;For though we
deem the short-lived fury past,’Tis sure the mighty will revenge at last.”To
whom Pelides:—“From thy inmost soulSpeak what thou know’st, and speak without
control.E’en by that god I swear who rules the day,To whom thy hands the vows of
Greece convey.And whose bless’d oracles thy lips declare;Long as Achilles
breathes this vital air,No daring Greek, of all the numerous band,Against his
priest shall lift an impious hand;Not e’en the chief by whom our hosts are
led,The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head.”Encouraged thus, the
blameless man replies:“Nor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice,But he, our
chief, provoked the raging pest,Apollo’s vengeance for his injured priest.Nor
will the god’s awaken’d fury cease,But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires
increase,Till the great king, without a ransom paid,To her own Chrysa send the
black-eyed maid.[54]Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer,The priest may
pardon, and the god may spare.”The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frownThe
monarch started from his shining throne;Black choler fill’d his breast that
boil’d with ire,And from his eye-balls flash’d the living fire:“Augur accursed!
denouncing mischief still,Prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill!Still must
that tongue some wounding message bring,And still thy priestly pride provoke thy
king?For this are Phœbus’ oracles explored,To teach the Greeks to murmur at
their lord?For this with falsehood is my honour stain’d,Is heaven offended, and
a priest profaned;Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold,And heavenly
charms prefer to proffer’d gold?A maid, unmatch’d in manners as in face,Skill’d
in each art, and crown’d with every grace;Not half so dear were Clytæmnestra’s
charms,When first her blooming beauties bless’d my arms.Yet, if the gods demand
her, let her sail;Our cares are only for the public weal:Let me be deem’d the
hateful cause of all,And suffer, rather than my people fall.The prize, the
beauteous prize, I will resign,So dearly valued, and so justly mine.But since
for common good I yield the fair,My private loss let grateful Greece repair;Nor
unrewarded let your prince complain,That he alone has fought and bled in
vain.”“Insatiate king (Achilles thus replies),Fond of the power, but fonder of
the prize!Would’st thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield,The due reward
of many a well-fought field?The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain,We
share with justice, as with toil we gain;But to resume whate’er thy avarice
craves(That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.Yet if our chief for
plunder only fight,The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite,Whene’er, by
Jove’s decree, our conquering powersShall humble to the dust her lofty
towers.”Then thus the king: “Shall I my prize resignWith tame content, and thou
possess’d of thine?Great as thou art, and like a god in fight,Think not to rob
me of a soldier’s right.At thy demand shall I restore the maid?First let the
just equivalent be paid;Such as a king might ask; and let it beA treasure worthy
her, and worthy me.Or grant me this, or with a monarch’s claimThis hand shall
seize some other captive dame.The mighty Ajax shall his prize
resign;[55]Ulysses’ spoils, or even thy own, be mine.The man who suffers, loudly
may complain;And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.But this when time
requires.—It now remainsWe launch a bark to plough the watery plains,And waft
the sacrifice to Chrysa’s shores,With chosen pilots, and with labouring
oars.Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend,And some deputed prince the
charge attend:This Creta’s king, or Ajax shall fulfil,Or wise Ulysses see
perform’d our will;Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain,Achilles’ self conduct
her o’er the main;Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,The god propitiate,
and the pest assuage.”[Illustration: ] MARSAt this, Pelides, frowning stern,
replied:“O tyrant, arm’d with insolence and pride!Inglorious slave to interest,
ever join’dWith fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!What generous Greek, obedient to
thy word,Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword?What cause have I to war
at thy decree?The distant Trojans never injured me;To Phthia’s realms no hostile
troops they led:Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed;Far hence removed, the
hoarse-resounding main,And walls of rocks, secure my native reign,Whose fruitful
soil luxuriant harvests grace,Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race.Hither
we sail’d, a voluntary throng,To avenge a private, not a public wrong:What else
to Troy the assembled nations draws,But thine, ungrateful, and thy brother’s
cause?Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve;Disgraced and injured by the
man we serve?And darest thou threat to snatch my prize away,Due to the deeds of
many a dreadful day?A prize as small, O tyrant! match’d with thine,As thy own
actions if compared to mine.Thine in each conquest is the wealthy prey,Though
mine the sweat and danger of the day.Some trivial present to my ships I bear:Or
barren praises pay the wounds of war.But know, proud monarch, I’m thy slave no
more;My fleet shall waft me to Thessalia’s shore:Left by Achilles on the Trojan
plain,What spoils, what conquests, shall Atrides gain?”To this the king: “Fly,
mighty warrior! fly;Thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy.There want not
chiefs in such a cause to fight,And Jove himself shall guard a monarch’s
right.Of all the kings (the god’s distinguish’d care)To power superior none such
hatred bear:Strife and debate thy restless soul employ,And wars and horrors are
thy savage joy,If thou hast strength, ’twas Heaven that strength bestow’d;For
know, vain man! thy valour is from God.Haste, launch thy vessels, fly with speed
away;Rule thy own realms with arbitrary sway;I heed thee not, but prize at equal
rateThy short-lived friendship, and thy groundless hate.Go, threat thy
earth-born Myrmidons:—but here[56]’Tis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to
fear.Know, if the god the beauteous dame demand,My bark shall waft her to her
native land;But then prepare, imperious prince! prepare,Fierce as thou art, to
yield thy captive fair:Even in thy tent I’ll seize the blooming prize,Thy loved
Briseïs with the radiant eyes.Hence shalt thou prove my might, and curse the
hourThou stood’st a rival of imperial power;And hence, to all our hosts it shall
be known,That kings are subject to the gods alone.”Achilles heard, with grief
and rage oppress’d,His heart swell’d high, and labour’d in his
breast;Distracting thoughts by turns his bosom ruled;Now fired by wrath, and now
by reason cool’d:That prompts his hand to draw the deadly sword,Force through
the Greeks, and pierce their haughty lord;This whispers soft his vengeance to
control,And calm the rising tempest of his soul.Just as in anguish of suspense
he stay’d,While half unsheathed appear’d the glittering blade,[57]Minerva swift
descended from above,Sent by the sister and the wife of Jove(For both the
princes claim’d her equal care);Behind she stood, and by the golden hairAchilles
seized; to him alone confess’d;A sable cloud conceal’d her from the rest.He
sees, and sudden to the goddess cries,Known by the flames that sparkle from her
eyes:[Illustration: ] MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES“Descends Minerva,
in her guardian care,A heavenly witness of the wrongs I bearFrom Atreus’
son?—Then let those eyes that viewThe daring crime, behold the vengeance
too.”“Forbear (the progeny of Jove replies)To calm thy fury I forsake the
skies:Let great Achilles, to the gods resign’d,To reason yield the empire o’er
his mind.By awful Juno this command is given;The king and you are both the care
of heaven.The force of keen reproaches let him feel;But sheathe, obedient, thy
revenging steel.For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly power)Thy injured honour
has its fated hour,When the proud monarch shall thy arms implore,And bribe thy
friendship with a boundless store.Then let revenge no longer bear the
sway;Command thy passions, and the gods obey.”To her Pelides:—“With regardful
ear,’Tis just, O goddess! I thy dictates hear.Hard as it is, my vengeance I
suppress:Those who revere the gods the gods will bless.”He said, observant of
the blue-eyed maid;Then in the sheath return’d the shining blade.The goddess
swift to high Olympus flies,And joins the sacred senate of the skies.Nor yet the
rage his boiling breast forsook,Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke:“O
monster! mix’d of insolence and fear,Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a
deer!When wert thou known in ambush’d fights to dare,Or nobly face the horrid
front of war?’Tis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try;Thine to look on,
and bid the valiant die:So much ’tis safer through the camp to go,And rob a
subject, than despoil a foe.Scourge of thy people, violent and base!Sent in
Jove’s anger on a slavish race;Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past,Are
tamed to wrongs;—or this had been thy last.Now by this sacred sceptre hear me
swear,Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,Which sever’d from the
trunk (as I from thee)On the bare mountains left its parent tree;This sceptre,
form’d by temper’d steel to proveAn ensign of the delegates of Jove,From whom
the power of laws and justice springs(Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings);By
this I swear:—when bleeding Greece againShall call Achilles, she shall call in
vain.When, flush’d with slaughter, Hector comes to spreadThe purpled shore with
mountains of the dead,Then shalt thou mourn the affront thy madness gave,Forced
to deplore when impotent to save:Then rage in bitterness of soul to knowThis act
has made the bravest Greek thy foe.”He spoke; and furious hurl’d against the
groundHis sceptre starr’d with golden studs around:Then sternly silent sat. With
like disdainThe raging king return’d his frowns again.To calm their passion with
the words of age,Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage,Experienced Nestor, in
persuasion skill’d;Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill’d:[58]Two
generations now had pass’d away,Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;Two
ages o’er his native realm he reign’d,And now the example of the third
remain’d.All view’d with awe the venerable man;Who thus with mild benevolence
began:—“What shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joyTo Troy’s proud monarch,
and the friends of Troy!That adverse gods commit to stern debateThe best, the
bravest, of the Grecian state.Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain,Nor
think your Nestor’s years and wisdom vain.A godlike race of heroes once I
knew,Such as no more these aged eyes shall view!Lives there a chief to match
Pirithous’ fame,Dryas the bold, or Ceneus’ deathless name;Theseus, endued with
more than mortal might,Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight?With these of old,
to toils of battle bred,In early youth my hardy days I led;Fired with the thirst
which virtuous envy breeds,And smit with love of honourable deeds,Strongest of
men, they pierced the mountain boar,Ranged the wild deserts red with monsters’
gore,And from their hills the shaggy Centaurs tore:Yet these with soft
persuasive arts I sway’d;When Nestor spoke, they listen’d and obey’d.If in my
youth, even these esteem’d me wise;Do you, young warriors, hear my age
advise.Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave;That prize the Greeks by common
suffrage gave:Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride;Let kings be just,
and sovereign power preside.Thee, the first honours of the war adorn,Like gods
in strength, and of a goddess born;Him, awful majesty exalts aboveThe powers of
earth, and sceptred sons of Jove.Let both unite with well-consenting mind,So
shall authority with strength be join’d.Leave me, O king! to calm Achilles’
rage;Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age.Forbid it, gods! Achilles should
be lost,The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host.”This said, he ceased. The
king of men replies:“Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.But that
imperious, that unconquer’d soul,No laws can limit, no respect control.Before
his pride must his superiors fall;His word the law, and he the lord of all?Him
must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey?What king can bear a rival in his
sway?Grant that the gods his matchless force have given;Has foul reproach a
privilege from heaven?”Here on the monarch’s speech Achilles broke,And furious,
thus, and interrupting spoke:“Tyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain,To live
thy slave, and still to serve in vain,Should I submit to each unjust
decree:—Command thy vassals, but command not me.Seize on Briseïs, whom the
Grecians doom’dMy prize of war, yet tamely see resumed;And seize secure; no more
Achilles drawsHis conquering sword in any woman’s cause.The gods command me to
forgive the past:But let this first invasion be the last:For know, thy blood,
when next thou darest invade,Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade.”At
this they ceased: the stern debate expired:The chiefs in sullen majesty
retired.Achilles with Patroclus took his wayWhere near his tents his hollow
vessels lay.Meantime Atrides launch’d with numerous oarsA well-rigg’d ship for
Chrysa’s sacred shores:High on the deck was fair Chryseïs placed,And sage
Ulysses with the conduct graced:Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stow’d,Then
swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road.The host to expiate next the king
prepares,With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.Wash’d by the briny
wave, the pious train[59]Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main.Along
the shore whole hecatombs were laid,And bulls and goats to Phœbus’ altars
paid;The sable fumes in curling spires arise,And waft their grateful odours to
the skies.The army thus in sacred rites engaged,Atrides still with deep
resentment raged.To wait his will two sacred heralds stood,Talthybius and
Eurybates the good.“Haste to the fierce Achilles’ tent (he cries),Thence bear
Briseïs as our royal prize:Submit he must; or if they will not part,Ourself in
arms shall tear her from his heart.”The unwilling heralds act their lord’s
commands;Pensive they walk along the barren sands:Arrived, the hero in his tent
they find,With gloomy aspect on his arm reclined.At awful distance long they
silent stand,Loth to advance, and speak their hard command;Decent confusion!
This the godlike manPerceived, and thus with accent mild began:“With leave and
honour enter our abodes,Ye sacred ministers of men and gods![60]I know your
message; by constraint you came;Not you, but your imperious lord I
blame.Patroclus, haste, the fair Briseïs bring;Conduct my captive to the haughty
king.But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow,Witness to gods above, and men
below!But first, and loudest, to your prince declare(That lawless tyrant whose
commands you bear),Unmoved as death Achilles shall remain,Though prostrate
Greece shall bleed at every vein:The raging chief in frantic passion lost,Blind
to himself, and useless to his host,Unskill’d to judge the future by the past,In
blood and slaughter shall repent at last.”[Illustration: ] THE DEPARTURE OF
BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLESPatroclus now the unwilling beauty brought;She,
in soft sorrows, and in pensive thought,Pass’d silent, as the heralds held her
hand,And oft look’d back, slow-moving o’er the strand.Not so his loss the fierce
Achilles bore;But sad, retiring to the sounding shore,O’er the wild margin of
the deep he hung,That kindred deep from whence his mother sprung:[61]There
bathed in tears of anger and disdain,Thus loud lamented to the stormy main:“O
parent goddess! since in early bloomThy son must fall, by too severe a doom;Sure
to so short a race of glory born,Great Jove in justice should this span
adorn:Honour and fame at least the thunderer owed;And ill he pays the promise of
a god,If yon proud monarch thus thy son defies,Obscures my glories, and resumes
my prize.”Far from the deep recesses of the main,Where aged Ocean holds his
watery reign,The goddess-mother heard. The waves divide;And like a mist she rose
above the tide;Beheld him mourning on the naked shores,And thus the sorrows of
his soul explores.“Why grieves my son? Thy anguish let me share;Reveal the
cause, and trust a parent’s care.”He deeply sighing said: “To tell my woeIs but
to mention what too well you know.From Thebé, sacred to Apollo’s
name[62](Aëtion’s realm), our conquering army came,With treasure loaded and
triumphant spoils,Whose just division crown’d the soldier’s toils;But bright
Chryseïs, heavenly prize! was led,By vote selected, to the general’s bed.The
priest of Phœbus sought by gifts to gainHis beauteous daughter from the victor’s
chain;The fleet he reach’d, and, lowly bending down,Held forth the sceptre and
the laurel crown,Intreating all; but chief implored for graceThe brother-kings
of Atreus’ royal race:The generous Greeks their joint consent declare,The priest
to reverence, and release the fair;Not so Atrides: he, with wonted pride,The
sire insulted, and his gifts denied:The insulted sire (his god’s peculiar
care)To Phœbus pray’d, and Phœbus heard the prayer:A dreadful plague ensues: the
avenging dartsIncessant fly, and pierce the Grecian hearts.A prophet then,
inspired by heaven, arose,And points the crime, and thence derives the
woes:Myself the first the assembled chiefs inclineTo avert the vengeance of the
power divine;Then rising in his wrath, the monarch storm’d;Incensed he
threaten’d, and his threats perform’d:The fair Chryseïs to her sire was
sent,With offer’d gifts to make the god relent;But now he seized Briseïs’
heavenly charms,And of my valour’s prize defrauds my arms,Defrauds the votes of
all the Grecian train;[63]And service, faith, and justice, plead in vain.But,
goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend.To high Olympus’ shining court
ascend,Urge all the ties to former service owed,And sue for vengeance to the
thundering god.Oft hast thou triumph’d in the glorious boast,That thou stood’st
forth of all the ethereal host,When bold rebellion shook the realms above,The
undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove:When the bright partner of his awful
reign,The warlike maid, and monarch of the main,The traitor-gods, by mad
ambition driven,Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.Then, call’d
by thee, the monster Titan came(Whom gods Briareus, men Ægeon name),Through
wondering skies enormous stalk’d along;Not he that shakes the solid earth so
strong:With giant-pride at Jove’s high throne he stands,And brandish’d round him
all his hundred hands:The affrighted gods confess’d their awful lord,They
dropp’d the fetters, trembled, and adored.[64]This, goddess, this to his
remembrance call,Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall;Conjure him far to
drive the Grecian train,To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main,To heap
the shores with copious death, and bringThe Greeks to know the curse of such a
king.Let Agamemnon lift his haughty headO’er all his wide dominion of the
dead,And mourn in blood that e’er he durst disgraceThe boldest warrior of the
Grecian race.”[Illustration: ] THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF
JUPITER“Unhappy son! (fair Thetis thus replies,While tears celestial trickle
from her eyes)Why have I borne thee with a mother’s throes,To Fates averse, and
nursed for future woes?[65]So short a space the light of heaven to view!So short
a space! and fill’d with sorrow too!O might a parent’s careful wish prevail,Far,
far from Ilion should thy vessels sail,And thou, from camps remote, the danger
shunWhich now, alas! too nearly threats my son.Yet (what I can) to move thy suit
I’ll goTo great Olympus crown’d with fleecy snow.Meantime, secure within thy
ships, from farBehold the field, not mingle in the war.The sire of gods and all
the ethereal train,On the warm limits of the farthest main,Now mix with mortals,
nor disdain to graceThe feasts of Æthiopia’s blameless race,[66]Twelve days the
powers indulge the genial rite,Returning with the twelfth revolving light.Then
will I mount the brazen dome, and moveThe high tribunal of immortal Jove.”The
goddess spoke: the rolling waves unclose;Then down the steep she plunged from
whence she rose,And left him sorrowing on the lonely coast,In wild resentment
for the fair he lost.In Chrysa’s port now sage Ulysses rode;Beneath the deck the
destined victims stow’d:The sails they furl’d, they lash the mast aside,And
dropp’d their anchors, and the pinnace tied.Next on the shore their hecatomb
they land;Chryseïs last descending on the strand.Her, thus returning from the
furrow’d main,Ulysses led to Phœbus’ sacred fane;Where at his solemn altar, as
the maidHe gave to Chryses, thus the hero said:“Hail, reverend priest! to
Phœbus’ awful domeA suppliant I from great Atrides come:Unransom’d, here receive
the spotless fair;Accept the hecatomb the Greeks prepare;And may thy god who
scatters darts around,Atoned by sacrifice, desist to wound.”[67]At this, the
sire embraced the maid again,So sadly lost, so lately sought in vain.Then near
the altar of the darting king,Disposed in rank their hecatomb they bring;With
water purify their hands, and takeThe sacred offering of the salted cake;While
thus with arms devoutly raised in air,And solemn voice, the priest directs his
prayer:“God of the silver bow, thy ear incline,Whose power incircles Cilla the
divine;Whose sacred eye thy Tenedos surveys,And gilds fair Chrysa with
distinguish’d rays!If, fired to vengeance at thy priest’s request,Thy direful
darts inflict the raging pest:Once more attend! avert the wasteful woe,And smile
propitious, and unbend thy bow.”So Chryses pray’d. Apollo heard his prayer:And
now the Greeks their hecatomb prepare;Between their horns the salted barley
threw,And, with their heads to heaven, the victims slew:[68]The limbs they sever
from the inclosing hide;The thighs, selected to the gods, divide:On these, in
double cauls involved with art,The choicest morsels lay from every part.The
priest himself before his altar stands,And burns the offering with his holy
hands.Pours the black wine, and sees the flames aspire;The youth with
instruments surround the fire:The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails
dress’d,The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest:Then spread the
tables, the repast prepare;Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.When
now the rage of hunger was repress’d,With pure libations they conclude the
feast;The youths with wine the copious goblets crown’d,[69]And, pleased,
dispense the flowing bowls aroundWith hymns divine the joyous banquet ends,The
pæans lengthen’d till the sun descends:The Greeks, restored, the grateful notes
prolong;Apollo listens, and approves the song.’Twas night; the chiefs beside
their vessel lie,Till rosy morn had purpled o’er the sky:Then launch, and hoist
the mast: indulgent gales,Supplied by Phœbus, fill the swelling sails;The
milk-white canvas bellying as they blow,The parted ocean foams and roars
below:Above the bounding billows swift they flew,Till now the Grecian camp
appear’d in view.Far on the beach they haul their bark to land,(The crooked keel
divides the yellow sand,)Then part, where stretch’d along the winding bay,The
ships and tents in mingled prospect lay.But raging still, amidst his navy satThe
stern Achilles, stedfast in his hate;Nor mix’d in combat, nor in council
join’d;But wasting cares lay heavy on his mind:In his black thoughts revenge and
slaughter roll,And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul.Twelve days were
past, and now the dawning lightThe gods had summon’d to the Olympian
height:Jove, first ascending from the watery bowers,Leads the long order of
ethereal powers.When, like the morning-mist in early day,Rose from the flood the
daughter of the sea:And to the seats divine her flight address’d.There, far
apart, and high above the rest,The thunderer sat; where old Olympus shroudsHis
hundred heads in heaven, and props the clouds.Suppliant the goddess stood: one
hand she placedBeneath his beard, and one his knees embraced.“If e’er, O father
of the gods! (she said)My words could please thee, or my actions aid,Some marks
of honour on my son bestow,And pay in glory what in life you owe.Fame is at
least by heavenly promise dueTo life so short, and now dishonour’d too.Avenge
this wrong, O ever just and wise!Let Greece be humbled, and the Trojans
rise;Till the proud king and all the Achaian raceShall heap with honours him
they now disgrace.”[Illustration: ] THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR
ACHILLESThus Thetis spoke; but Jove in silence heldThe sacred counsels of his
breast conceal’d.Not so repulsed, the goddess closer press’d,Still grasp’d his
knees, and urged the dear request.“O sire of gods and men! thy suppliant
hear;Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?Or oh! declare, of all the
powers above,Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?”She said; and, sighing,
thus the god replies,Who rolls the thunder o’er the vaulted skies:“What hast
thou ask’d? ah, why should Jove engageIn foreign contests and domestic rage,The
gods’ complaints, and Juno’s fierce alarms,While I, too partial, aid the Trojan
arms?Go, lest the haughty partner of my swayWith jealous eyes thy close access
survey;But part in peace, secure thy prayer is sped:Witness the sacred honours
of our head,The nod that ratifies the will divine,The faithful, fix’d,
irrevocable sign;This seals thy suit, and this fulfils thy vows—”He spoke, and
awful bends his sable brows,[70]Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the
nod,The stamp of fate and sanction of the god:High heaven with trembling the
dread signal took,And all Olympus to the centre shook.[71]Swift to the seas
profound the goddess flies,Jove to his starry mansions in the skies.The shining
synod of the immortals waitThe coming god, and from their thrones of
stateArising silent, wrapp’d in holy fear,Before the majesty of heaven
appear.Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the throne,All, but the god’s
imperious queen alone:Late had she view’d the silver-footed dame,And all her
passions kindled into flame.“Say, artful manager of heaven (she cries),Who now
partakes the secrets of the skies?Thy Juno knows not the decrees of fate,In vain
the partner of imperial state.What favourite goddess then those cares
divides,Which Jove in prudence from his consort hides?”To this the thunderer:
“Seek not thou to findThe sacred counsels of almighty mind:Involved in darkness
lies the great decree,Nor can the depths of fate be pierced by thee.What fits
thy knowledge, thou the first shalt know;The first of gods above, and men
below;But thou, nor they, shall search the thoughts that rollDeep in the close
recesses of my soul.”Full on the sire the goddess of the skiesRoll’d the large
orbs of her majestic eyes,And thus return’d:—“Austere Saturnius, say,From whence
this wrath, or who controls thy sway?Thy boundless will, for me, remains in
force,And all thy counsels take the destined course.But ’tis for Greece I fear:
for late was seen,In close consult, the silver-footed queen.Jove to his Thetis
nothing could deny,Nor was the signal vain that shook the sky.What fatal favour
has the goddess won,To grace her fierce, inexorable son?Perhaps in Grecian blood
to drench the plain,And glut his vengeance with my people slain.”Then thus the
god: “O restless fate of pride,That strives to learn what heaven resolves to
hide;Vain is the search, presumptuous and abhorr’d,Anxious to thee, and odious
to thy lord.Let this suffice: the immutable decreeNo force can shake: what is,
that ought to be.Goddess, submit; nor dare our will withstand,But dread the
power of this avenging hand:The united strength of all the gods aboveIn vain
resists the omnipotence of Jove.”[Illustration: ] VULCANThe thunderer spoke, nor
durst the queen reply;A reverent horror silenced all the sky.The feast
disturb’d, with sorrow Vulcan sawHis mother menaced, and the gods in awe;Peace
at his heart, and pleasure his design,Thus interposed the architect divine:“The
wretched quarrels of the mortal stateAre far unworthy, gods! of your debate:Let
men their days in senseless strife employ,We, in eternal peace and constant
joy.Thou, goddess-mother, with our sire comply,Nor break the sacred union of the
sky:Lest, roused to rage, he shake the bless’d abodes,Launch the red lightning,
and dethrone the gods.If you submit, the thunderer stands appeased;The gracious
power is willing to be pleased.”Thus Vulcan spoke: and rising with a bound,The
double bowl with sparkling nectar crown’d,[72]Which held to Juno in a cheerful
way,“Goddess (he cried), be patient and obey.Dear as you are, if Jove his arm
extend,I can but grieve, unable to defend.What god so daring in your aid to
move,Or lift his hand against the force of Jove?Once in your cause I felt his
matchless might,Hurl’d headlong down from the ethereal height;[73]Toss’d all the
day in rapid circles round,Nor till the sun descended touch’d the
ground.Breathless I fell, in giddy motion lost;The Sinthians raised me on the
Lemnian coast;[74]He said, and to her hands the goblet heaved,Which, with a
smile, the white-arm’d queen receivedThen, to the rest he fill’d; and in his
turn,Each to his lips applied the nectar’d urn,Vulcan with awkward grace his
office plies,And unextinguish’d laughter shakes the skies.Thus the blest gods
the genial day prolong,In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.[75]Apollo tuned
the lyre; the Muses roundWith voice alternate aid the silver sound.Meantime the
radiant sun to mortal sightDescending swift, roll’d down the rapid light:Then to
their starry domes the gods depart,The shining monuments of Vulcan’s art:Jove on
his couch reclined his awful head,And Juno slumber’d on the golden
bed.[Illustration: ] JUPITER[Illustration: ] THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMERBOOK
II.ARGUMENT.THE TRIAL OF THE ARMY, AND CATALOGUE OF THE FORCES.Jupiter, in
pursuance of the request of Thetis, sends a deceitfulvision to Agamemnon,
persuading him to lead the army to battle, inorder to make the Greeks sensible
of their want of Achilles. Thegeneral, who is deluded with the hopes of taking
Troy without hisassistance, but fears the army was discouraged by his absence,
and thelate plague, as well as by the length of time, contrives to make trialof
their disposition by a stratagem. He first communicates his designto the princes
in council, that he would propose a return to thesoldiers, and that they should
put a stop to them if the proposal wasembraced. Then he assembles the whole
host, and upon moving for areturn to Greece, they unanimously agree to it, and
run to prepare theships. They are detained by the management of Ulysses, who
chastisesthe insolence of Thersites. The assembly is recalled, several
speechesmade on the occasion, and at length the advice of Nestor followed,which
was to make a general muster of the troops, and to divide theminto their several
nations, before they proceeded to battle. This givesoccasion to the poet to
enumerate all the forces of the Greeks andTrojans, and in a large catalogue. The
time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day. The scene lies in
the Grecian camp, and upon the sea-shore; towards the end it removes to Troy.Now
pleasing sleep had seal’d each mortal eye,Stretch’d in the tents the Grecian
leaders lie:The immortals slumber’d on their thrones above;All, but the
ever-wakeful eyes of Jove.[76]To honour Thetis’ son he bends his care,And plunge
the Greeks in all the woes of war:Then bids an empty phantom rise to sight,And
thus commands the vision of the night.“Fly hence, deluding Dream! and light as
air,[77]To Agamemnon’s ample tent repair.Bid him in arms draw forth the
embattled train,Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain.Declare, e’en now ’tis
given him to destroyThe lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.For now no more the
gods with fate contend,At Juno’s suit the heavenly factions end.Destruction
hangs o’er yon devoted wall,And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.”Swift as
the word the vain illusion fled,Descends, and hovers o’er Atrides’ head;Clothed
in the figure of the Pylian sage,Renown’d for wisdom, and revered for age:Around
his temples spreads his golden wing,And thus the flattering dream deceives the
king.[Illustration: ] JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON“Canst thou,
with all a monarch’s cares oppress’d,O Atreus’ son! canst thou indulge thy
rest?[78]Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,Directs in council, and in
war presides,To whom its safety a whole people owes,To waste long nights in
indolent repose.[79]Monarch, awake! ’tis Jove’s command I bear;Thou, and thy
glory, claim his heavenly care.In just array draw forth the embattled train,Lead
all thy Grecians to the dusty plain;E’en now, O king! ’tis given thee to
destroyThe lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.For now no more the gods with fate
contend,At Juno’s suit the heavenly factions end.Destruction hangs o’er yon
devoted wall,And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.Awake, but waking this
advice approve,And trust the vision that descends from Jove.”The phantom said;
then vanish’d from his sight,Resolves to air, and mixes with the night.A
thousand schemes the monarch’s mind employ;Elate in thought he sacks untaken
Troy:Vain as he was, and to the future blind,Nor saw what Jove and secret fate
design’d,What mighty toils to either host remain,What scenes of grief, and
numbers of the slain!Eager he rises, and in fancy hearsThe voice celestial
murmuring in his ears.First on his limbs a slender vest he drew,Around him next
the regal mantle threw,The embroider’d sandals on his feet were tied;The starry
falchion glitter’d at his side;And last, his arm the massy sceptre
loads,Unstain’d, immortal, and the gift of gods.Now rosy Morn ascends the court
of Jove,Lifts up her light, and opens day above.The king despatch’d his heralds
with commandsTo range the camp and summon all the bands:The gathering hosts the
monarch’s word obey;While to the fleet Atrides bends his way.In his black ship
the Pylian prince he found;There calls a senate of the peers around:The assembly
placed, the king of men express’dThe counsels labouring in his artful
breast.“Friends and confederates! with attentive earReceive my words, and credit
what you hear.Late as I slumber’d in the shades of night,A dream divine appear’d
before my sight;Whose visionary form like Nestor came,The same in habit, and in
mien the same.[80]The heavenly phantom hover’d o’er my head,‘And, dost thou
sleep, O Atreus’ son? (he said)Ill fits a chief who mighty nations
guides,Directs in council, and in war presides;To whom its safety a whole people
owes,To waste long nights in indolent repose.Monarch, awake! ’tis Jove’s command
I bear,Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.In just array draw forth the
embattled train,And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain;E’en now, O king! ’tis
given thee to destroyThe lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.For now no more the
gods with fate contend,At Juno’s suit the heavenly factions end.Destruction
hangs o’er yon devoted wall,And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.This hear
observant, and the gods obey!’The vision spoke, and pass’d in air away.Now,
valiant chiefs! since heaven itself alarms,Unite, and rouse the sons of Greece
to arms.But first, with caution, try what yet they dare,Worn with nine years of
unsuccessful war.To move the troops to measure back the main,Be mine; and yours
the province to detain.”He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said,(Nestor,
whom Pylos’ sandy realms obey’d,)“Princes of Greece, your faithful ears
incline,Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine;Sent by great Jove to him who
rules the host,Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost!Then let us haste,
obey the god’s alarms,And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms.”Thus spoke
the sage: the kings without delayDissolve the council, and their chief obey:The
sceptred rulers lead; the following host,Pour’d forth by thousands, darkens all
the coast.As from some rocky cleft the shepherd seesClustering in heaps on heaps
the driving bees,Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,With deeper
murmurs and more hoarse alarms;Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd,And
o’er the vale descends the living cloud.[81]So, from the tents and ships, a
lengthen’d trainSpreads all the beach, and wide o’ershades the plain:Along the
region runs a deafening sound;Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling
ground.Fame flies before the messenger of Jove,And shining soars, and claps her
wings above.Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loud[82]The monarch’s will,
suspend the listening crowd.Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear,And
fainter murmurs died upon the ear,The king of kings his awful figure raised:High
in his hand the golden sceptre blazed;The golden sceptre, of celestial flame,By
Vulcan form’d, from Jove to Hermes came.To Pelops he the immortal gift
resign’d;The immortal gift great Pelops left behind,In Atreus’ hand, which not
with Atreus ends,To rich Thyestes next the prize descends;And now the mark of
Agamemnon’s reign,Subjects all Argos, and controls the main.[83]On this bright
sceptre now the king reclined,And artful thus pronounced the speech design’d:“Ye
sons of Mars, partake your leader’s care,Heroes of Greece, and brothers of the
war!Of partial Jove with justice I complain,And heavenly oracles believed in
vainA safe return was promised to our toils,Renown’d, triumphant, and enrich’d
with spoils.Now shameful flight alone can save the host,Our blood, our treasure,
and our glory lost.So Jove decrees, resistless lord of all!At whose command
whole empires rise or fall:He shakes the feeble props of human trust,And towns
and armies humbles to the dust.What shame to Greece a fruitful war to wage,Oh,
lasting shame in every future age!Once great in arms, the common scorn we
grow,Repulsed and baffled by a feeble foe.So small their number, that if wars
were ceased,And Greece triumphant held a general feast,All rank’d by tens, whole
decades when they dineMust want a Trojan slave to pour the wine.[84]But other
forces have our hopes o’erthrown,And Troy prevails by armies not her own.Now
nine long years of mighty Jove are run,Since first the labours of this war
begun:Our cordage torn, decay’d our vessels lie,And scarce insure the wretched
power to fly.Haste, then, for ever leave the Trojan wall!Our weeping wives, our
tender children call:Love, duty, safety, summon us away,’Tis nature’s voice, and
nature we obey.Our shatter’d barks may yet transport us o’er,Safe and
inglorious, to our native shore.Fly, Grecians, fly, your sails and oars
employ,And dream no more of heaven-defended Troy.”His deep design unknown, the
hosts approveAtrides’ speech. The mighty numbers move.So roll the billows to the
Icarian shore,From east and south when winds begin to roar,Burst their dark
mansions in the clouds, and sweepThe whitening surface of the ruffled deep.And
as on corn when western gusts descend,[85]Before the blast the lofty harvests
bend:Thus o’er the field the moving host appears,With nodding plumes and groves
of waving spears.The gathering murmur spreads, their trampling feetBeat the
loose sands, and thicken to the fleet;With long-resounding cries they urge the
trainTo fit the ships, and launch into the main.They toil, they sweat, thick
clouds of dust arise,The doubling clamours echo to the skies.E’en then the
Greeks had left the hostile plain,And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain;But
Jove’s imperial queen their flight survey’d,And sighing thus bespoke the
blue-eyed maid:“Shall then the Grecians fly! O dire disgrace!And leave
unpunish’d this perfidious race?Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous
spouse,In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows?And bravest chiefs, in Helen’s
quarrel slain,Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?No: let my Greeks, unmoved by
vain alarms,Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.Haste, goddess, haste! the
flying host detain,Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main.”Pallas obeys, and
from Olympus’ heightSwift to the ships precipitates her flight.Ulysses, first in
public cares, she found,For prudent counsel like the gods renown’d:Oppress’d
with generous grief the hero stood,Nor drew his sable vessels to the flood.“And
is it thus, divine Laertes’ son,Thus fly the Greeks (the martial maid
begun),Thus to their country bear their own disgrace,And fame eternal leave to
Priam’s race?Shall beauteous Helen still remain unfreed,Still unrevenged, a
thousand heroes bleed!Haste, generous Ithacus! prevent the shame,Recall your
armies, and your chiefs reclaim.Your own resistless eloquence employ,And to the
immortals trust the fall of Troy.”The voice divine confess’d the warlike
maid,Ulysses heard, nor uninspired obey’d:Then meeting first Atrides, from his
handReceived the imperial sceptre of command.Thus graced, attention and respect
to gain,He runs, he flies through all the Grecian train;Each prince of name, or
chief in arms approved,He fired with praise, or with persuasion moved.“Warriors
like you, with strength and wisdom bless’d,By brave examples should confirm the
rest.The monarch’s will not yet reveal’d appears;He tries our courage, but
resents our fears.The unwary Greeks his fury may provoke;Not thus the king in
secret council spoke.Jove loves our chief, from Jove his honour springs,Beware!
for dreadful is the wrath of kings.”But if a clamorous vile plebeian rose,Him
with reproof he check’d or tamed with blows.“Be still, thou slave, and to thy
betters yield;Unknown alike in council and in field!Ye gods, what dastards would
our host command!Swept to the war, the lumber of a land.Be silent, wretch, and
think not here allow’dThat worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd.To one sole
monarch Jove commits the sway;His are the laws, and him let all obey.”[86]With
words like these the troops Ulysses ruled,The loudest silenced, and the fiercest
cool’d.Back to the assembly roll the thronging train,Desert the ships, and pour
upon the plain.Murmuring they move, as when old ocean roars,And heaves huge
surges to the trembling shores;The groaning banks are burst with bellowing
sound,The rocks remurmur and the deeps rebound.At length the tumult sinks, the
noises cease,And a still silence lulls the camp to peace.Thersites only
clamour’d in the throng,Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of tongue:Awed by no
shame, by no respect controll’d,In scandal busy, in reproaches bold:With witty
malice studious to defame,Scorn all his joy, and laughter all his aim:—But chief
he gloried with licentious styleTo lash the great, and monarchs to revile.His
figure such as might his soul proclaim;One eye was blinking, and one leg was
lame:His mountain shoulders half his breast o’erspread,Thin hairs bestrew’d his
long misshapen head.Spleen to mankind his envious heart possess’d,And much he
hated all, but most the best:Ulysses or Achilles still his theme;But royal
scandal his delight supreme,Long had he lived the scorn of every Greek,Vex’d
when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak.Sharp was his voice; which in the
shrillest tone,Thus with injurious taunts attack’d the throne.“Amidst the
glories of so bright a reign,What moves the great Atrides to complain?’Tis thine
whate’er the warrior’s breast inflames,The golden spoil, and thine the lovely
dames.With all the wealth our wars and blood bestow,Thy tents are crowded and
thy chests o’erflow.Thus at full ease in heaps of riches roll’d,What grieves the
monarch? Is it thirst of gold?Say, shall we march with our unconquer’d
powers(The Greeks and I) to Ilion’s hostile towers,And bring the race of royal
bastards here,For Troy to ransom at a price too dear?But safer plunder thy own
host supplies;Say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leader’s prize?Or, if thy
heart to generous love be led,Some captive fair, to bless thy kingly
bed?Whate’er our master craves submit we must,Plagued with his pride, or
punish’d for his lust.Oh women of Achaia; men no more!Hence let us fly, and let
him waste his storeIn loves and pleasures on the Phrygian shore.We may be wanted
on some busy day,When Hector comes: so great Achilles may:From him he forced the
prize we jointly gave,From him, the fierce, the fearless, and the brave:And
durst he, as he ought, resent that wrong,This mighty tyrant were no tyrant
long.”Fierce from his seat at this Ulysses springs,[87]In generous vengeance of
the king of kings.With indignation sparkling in his eyes,He views the wretch,
and sternly thus replies:“Peace, factious monster, born to vex the state,With
wrangling talents form’d for foul debate:Curb that impetuous tongue, nor rashly
vain,And singly mad, asperse the sovereign reign.Have we not known thee, slave!
of all our host,The man who acts the least, upbraids the most?Think not the
Greeks to shameful flight to bring,Nor let those lips profane the name of
king.For our return we trust the heavenly powers;Be that their care; to fight
like men be ours.But grant the host with wealth the general load,Except
detraction, what hast thou bestow’d?Suppose some hero should his spoils
resign,Art thou that hero, could those spoils be thine?Gods! let me perish on
this hateful shore,And let these eyes behold my son no more;If, on thy next
offence, this hand forbearTo strip those arms thou ill deserv’st to wear,Expel
the council where our princes meet,And send thee scourged and howling through
the fleet.”He said, and cowering as the dastard bends,The weighty sceptre on his
back descends.[88]On the round bunch the bloody tumours rise:The tears spring
starting from his haggard eyes;Trembling he sat, and shrunk in abject fears,From
his vile visage wiped the scalding tears;While to his neighbour each express’d
his thought:“Ye gods! what wonders has Ulysses wrought!What fruits his conduct
and his courage yield!Great in the council, glorious in the field.Generous he
rises in the crown’s defence,To curb the factious tongue of insolence,Such just
examples on offenders shown,Sedition silence, and assert the throne.”’Twas thus
the general voice the hero praised,Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre
raised:The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend,(In form a herald,) bade the
crowds attend.The expecting crowds in still attention hung,To hear the wisdom of
his heavenly tongue.Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke,His silence
thus the prudent hero broke:“Unhappy monarch! whom the Grecian raceWith shame
deserting, heap with vile disgrace.Not such at Argos was their generous vow:Once
all their voice, but ah! forgotten now:Ne’er to return, was then the common
cry,Till Troy’s proud structures should in ashes lie.Behold them weeping for
their native shore;What could their wives or helpless children more?What heart
but melts to leave the tender train,And, one short month, endure the wintry
main?Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat,When the ship tosses, and
the tempests beat:Then well may this long stay provoke their tears,The tedious
length of nine revolving years.Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame;But
vanquish’d! baffled! oh, eternal shame!Expect the time to Troy’s destruction
given.And try the faith of Chalcas and of heaven.What pass’d at Aulis, Greece
can witness bear,[89]And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air.Beside a
fountain’s sacred brink we raisedOur verdant altars, and the victims
blazed:’Twas where the plane-tree spread its shades around,The altars heaved;
and from the crumbling groundA mighty dragon shot, of dire portent;From Jove
himself the dreadful sign was sent.Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he
roll’d,And curl’d around in many a winding fold;The topmost branch a mother-bird
possess’d;Eight callow infants fill’d the mossy nest;Herself the ninth; the
serpent, as he hung,Stretch’d his black jaws and crush’d the crying young;While
hovering near, with miserable moan,The drooping mother wail’d her children
gone.The mother last, as round the nest she flew,Seized by the beating wing, the
monster slew;Nor long survived: to marble turn’d, he standsA lasting prodigy on
Aulis’ sands.Such was the will of Jove; and hence we dareTrust in his omen, and
support the war.For while around we gazed with wondering eyes,And trembling
sought the powers with sacrifice,Full of his god, the reverend Chalcas
cried,[90]‘Ye Grecian warriors! lay your fears aside.This wondrous signal Jove
himself displays,Of long, long labours, but eternal praise.As many birds as by
the snake were slain,So many years the toils of Greece remain;But wait the
tenth, for Ilion’s fall decreed:’Thus spoke the prophet, thus the Fates
succeed.Obey, ye Grecians! with submission wait,Nor let your flight avert the
Trojan fate.”He said: the shores with loud applauses sound,The hollow ships each
deafening shout rebound.Then Nestor thus—“These vain debates forbear,Ye talk
like children, not like heroes dare.Where now are all your high resolves at
last?Your leagues concluded, your engagements past?Vow’d with libations and with
victims then,Now vanish’d like their smoke: the faith of men!While useless words
consume the unactive hours,No wonder Troy so long resists our powers.Rise, great
Atrides! and with courage sway;We march to war, if thou direct the way.But leave
the few that dare resist thy laws,The mean deserters of the Grecian cause,To
grudge the conquests mighty Jove prepares,And view with envy our successful
wars.On that great day, when first the martial train,Big with the fate of Ilion,
plough’d the main,Jove, on the right, a prosperous signal sent,And thunder
rolling shook the firmament.Encouraged hence, maintain the glorious strife,Till
every soldier grasp a Phrygian wife,Till Helen’s woes at full revenged
appear,And Troy’s proud matrons render tear for tear.Before that day, if any
Greek inviteHis country’s troops to base, inglorious flight,Stand forth that
Greek! and hoist his sail to fly,And die the dastard first, who dreads to
die.But now, O monarch! all thy chiefs advise:[91]Nor what they offer, thou
thyself despise.Among those counsels, let not mine be vain;In tribes and nations
to divide thy train:His separate troops let every leader call,Each strengthen
each, and all encourage all.What chief, or soldier, of the numerous band,Or
bravely fights, or ill obeys command,When thus distinct they war, shall soon be
knownAnd what the cause of Ilion not o’erthrown;If fate resists, or if our arms
are slow,If gods above prevent, or men below.”To him the king: “How much thy
years excelIn arts of counsel, and in speaking well!O would the gods, in love to
Greece, decreeBut ten such sages as they grant in thee;Such wisdom soon should
Priam’s force destroy,And soon should fall the haughty towers of Troy!But Jove
forbids, who plunges those he hatesIn fierce contention and in vain debates:Now
great Achilles from our aid withdraws,By me provoked; a captive maid the
cause:If e’er as friends we join, the Trojan wallMust shake, and heavy will the
vengeance fall!But now, ye warriors, take a short repast;And, well refresh’d, to
bloody conflict haste.His sharpen’d spear let every Grecian wield,And every
Grecian fix his brazen shield,Let all excite the fiery steeds of war,And all for
combat fit the rattling car.This day, this dreadful day, let each contend;No
rest, no respite, till the shades descend;Till darkness, or till death, shall
cover all:Let the war bleed, and let the mighty fall;Till bathed in sweat be
every manly breast,With the huge shield each brawny arm depress’d,Each aching
nerve refuse the lance to throw,And each spent courser at the chariot blow.Who
dares, inglorious, in his ships to stay,Who dares to tremble on this signal
day;That wretch, too mean to fall by martial power,The birds shall mangle, and
the dogs devour.”The monarch spoke; and straight a murmur rose,Loud as the
surges when the tempest blows,That dash’d on broken rocks tumultuous roar,And
foam and thunder on the stony shore.Straight to the tents the troops dispersing
bend,The fires are kindled, and the smokes ascend;With hasty feasts they
sacrifice, and pray,To avert the dangers of the doubtful day.A steer of five
years’ age, large limb’d, and fed,[92]To Jove’s high altars Agamemnon led:There
bade the noblest of the Grecian peers;And Nestor first, as most advanced in
years.Next came Idomeneus,[93] and Tydeus’ son,[94]Ajax the less, and Ajax
Telamon;[95]Then wise Ulysses in his rank was placed;And Menelaus came, unbid,
the last.[96]The chiefs surround the destined beast, and takeThe sacred offering
of the salted cake:When thus the king prefers his solemn prayer;“O thou! whose
thunder rends the clouded air,Who in the heaven of heavens hast fixed thy
throne,Supreme of gods! unbounded, and alone!Hear! and before the burning sun
descends,Before the night her gloomy veil extends,Low in the dust be laid yon
hostile spires,Be Priam’s palace sunk in Grecian fires.In Hector’s breast be
plunged this shining sword,And slaughter’d heroes groan around their lord!”Thus
prayed the chief: his unavailing prayerGreat Jove refused, and toss’d in empty
air:The God averse, while yet the fumes arose,Prepared new toils, and doubled
woes on woes.Their prayers perform’d the chiefs the rite pursue,The barley
sprinkled, and the victim slew.The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide,The
thighs, selected to the gods, divide.On these, in double cauls involved with
art,The choicest morsels lie from every part,From the cleft wood the crackling
flames aspireWhile the fat victims feed the sacred fire.The thighs thus
sacrificed, and entrails dress’dThe assistants part, transfix, and roast the
rest;Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,Each takes his seat, and each
receives his share.Soon as the rage of hunger was suppress’d,The generous Nestor
thus the prince address’d.“Now bid thy heralds sound the loud alarms,And call
the squadrons sheathed in brazen arms;Now seize the occasion, now the troops
survey,And lead to war when heaven directs the way.”He said; the monarch issued
his commands;Straight the loud heralds call the gathering bands;The chiefs
inclose their king; the hosts divide,In tribes and nations rank’d on either
side.High in the midst the blue-eyed virgin flies;From rank to rank she darts
her ardent eyes;The dreadful ægis, Jove’s immortal shield,Blazed on her arm, and
lighten’d all the field:Round the vast orb a hundred serpents roll’d,Form’d the
bright fringe, and seem’d to burn in gold,With this each Grecian’s manly breast
she warms,Swells their bold hearts, and strings their nervous arms,No more they
sigh, inglorious, to return,But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.As on
some mountain, through the lofty grove,The crackling flames ascend, and blaze
above;The fires expanding, as the winds arise,Shoot their long beams, and kindle
half the skies:So from the polish’d arms, and brazen shields,A gleamy splendour
flash’d along the fields.Not less their number than the embodied cranes,Or
milk-white swans in Asius’ watery plains.That, o’er the windings of Cayster’s
springs,[97]Stretch their long necks, and clap their rustling wings,Now tower
aloft, and course in airy rounds,Now light with noise; with noise the field
resounds.Thus numerous and confused, extending wide,The legions crowd
Scamander’s flowery side;[98]With rushing troops the plains are cover’d o’er,And
thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.Along the river’s level meads they
stand,Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land,Or leaves the trees; or
thick as insects play,The wandering nation of a summer’s day:That, drawn by
milky steams, at evening hours,In gather’d swarms surround the rural bowers;From
pail to pail with busy murmur runThe gilded legions, glittering in the sun.So
throng’d, so close, the Grecian squadrons stoodIn radiant arms, and thirst for
Trojan blood.Each leader now his scatter’d force conjoinsIn close array, and
forms the deepening lines.Not with more ease the skilful shepherd-swainCollects
his flocks from thousands on the plain.The king of kings, majestically
tall,Towers o’er his armies, and outshines them all;Like some proud bull, that
round the pastures leadsHis subject herds, the monarch of the meads,Great as the
gods, the exalted chief was seen,His strength like Neptune, and like Mars his
mien;[99]Jove o’er his eyes celestial glories spread,And dawning conquest played
around his head.Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine,All-knowing
goddesses! immortal nine![100]Since earth’s wide regions, heaven’s umneasur’d
height,And hell’s abyss, hide nothing from your sight,(We, wretched mortals!
lost in doubts below,But guess by rumour, and but boast we know,)O say what
heroes, fired by thirst of fame,Or urged by wrongs, to Troy’s destruction
came.To count them all, demands a thousand tongues,A throat of brass, and
adamantine lungs.Daughters of Jove, assist! inspired by youThe mighty labour
dauntless I pursue;What crowded armies, from what climes they bring,Their names,
their numbers, and their chiefs I sing.THE CATALOGUE OF THE
SHIPS.[101][Illustration: ] NEPTUNEThe hardy warriors whom Bœotia bred,Penelius,
Leitus, Prothoënor, led:With these Arcesilaus and Clonius stand,Equal in arms,
and equal in command.These head the troops that rocky Aulis yields,And Eteon’s
hills, and Hyrie’s watery fields,And Schoenos, Scholos, Græa near the main,And
Mycalessia’s ample piny plain;Those who in Peteon or Ilesion dwell,Or Harma
where Apollo’s prophet fell;Heleon and Hylè, which the springs o’erflow;And
Medeon lofty, and Ocalea low;Or in the meads of Haliartus stray,Or Thespia
sacred to the god of day:Onchestus, Neptune’s celebrated groves;Copæ, and
Thisbè, famed for silver doves;For flocks Erythræ, Glissa for the vine;Platea
green, and Nysa the divine;And they whom Thebé’s well-built walls inclose,Where
Mydè, Eutresis, Coronè, rose;And Arnè rich, with purple harvests crown’d;And
Anthedon, Bœotia’s utmost bound.Full fifty ships they send, and each
conveysTwice sixty warriors through the foaming seas.[102]To these succeed
Aspledon’s martial train,Who plough the spacious Orchomenian plain.Two valiant
brothers rule the undaunted throng,Iälmen and Ascalaphus the strong:Sons of
Astyochè, the heavenly fair,Whose virgin charms subdued the god of war:(In
Actor’s court as she retired to rest,The strength of Mars the blushing maid
compress’d)Their troops in thirty sable vessels sweep,With equal oars, the
hoarse-resounding deep.The Phocians next in forty barks repair;Epistrophus and
Schedius head the war:From those rich regions where Cephisus leadsHis silver
current through the flowery meads;From Panopëa, Chrysa the divine,Where
Anemoria’s stately turrets shine,Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood,And fair
Lilæ views the rising flood.These, ranged in order on the floating tide,Close,
on the left, the bold Bœotians’ side.Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons
on,Ajax the less, Oïleus’ valiant son;Skill’d to direct the flying dart
aright;Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight.Him, as their chief, the chosen
troops attend,Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send;Opus, Calliarus, and
Scarphe’s bands;And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands,And where
Boägrius floats the lowly lands,Or in fair Tarphe’s sylvan seats reside:In forty
vessels cut the yielding tide.Eubœa next her martial sons prepares,And sends the
brave Abantes to the wars:Breathing revenge, in arms they take their wayFrom
Chalcis’ walls, and strong Eretria;The Isteian fields for generous vines
renown’d,The fair Caristos, and the Styrian ground;Where Dios from her towers
o’erlooks the plain,And high Cerinthus views the neighbouring main.Down their
broad shoulders falls a length of hair;Their hands dismiss not the long lance in
air;But with protended spears in fighting fieldsPierce the tough corslets and
the brazen shields.Twice twenty ships transport the warlike bands,Which bold
Elphenor, fierce in arms, commands.Full fifty more from Athens stem the main,Led
by Menestheus through the liquid plain.(Athens the fair, where great Erectheus
sway’d,That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,But from the teeming furrow
took his birth,The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.Him Pallas placed
amidst her wealthy fane,Adored with sacrifice and oxen slain;Where, as the years
revolve, her altars blaze,And all the tribes resound the goddess’ praise.)No
chief like thee, Menestheus! Greece could yield,To marshal armies in the dusty
field,The extended wings of battle to display,Or close the embodied host in firm
array.Nestor alone, improved by length of days,For martial conduct bore an equal
praise.With these appear the Salaminian bands,Whom the gigantic Telamon
commands;In twelve black ships to Troy they steer their course,And with the
great Athenians join their force.Next move to war the generous Argive train,From
high Trœzenè, and Maseta’s plain,And fair Ægina circled by the main:Whom strong
Tyrinthe’s lofty walls surround,And Epidaure with viny harvests crown’d:And
where fair Asinen and Hermoin showTheir cliffs above, and ample bay below.These
by the brave Euryalus were led,Great Sthenelus, and greater Diomed;But chief
Tydides bore the sovereign sway:In fourscore barks they plough the watery
way.The proud Mycenè arms her martial powers,Cleonè, Corinth, with imperial
towers,[103]Fair Aræthyrea, Ornia’s fruitful plain,And Ægion, and Adrastus’
ancient reign;And those who dwell along the sandy shore,And where Pellenè yields
her fleecy store,Where Helicè and Hyperesia lie,And Gonoëssa’s spires salute the
sky.Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band,A hundred vessels in long order
stand,And crowded nations wait his dread command.High on the deck the king of
men appears,And his refulgent arms in triumph wears;Proud of his host,
unrivall’d in his reign,In silent pomp he moves along the main.His brother
follows, and to vengeance warmsThe hardy Spartans, exercised in arms:Phares and
Brysia’s valiant troops, and thoseWhom Lacedæmon’s lofty hills inclose;Or
Messé’s towers for silver doves renown’d,Amyclæ, Laäs, Augia’s happy ground,And
those whom Œtylos’ low walls contain,And Helos, on the margin of the main.These,
o’er the bending ocean, Helen’s cause,In sixty ships with Menelaus draws:Eager
and loud from man to man he flies,Revenge and fury flaming in his eyes;While
vainly fond, in fancy oft he hearsThe fair one’s grief, and sees her falling
tears.In ninety sail, from Pylos’ sandy coast,Nestor the sage conducts his
chosen host:From Amphigenia’s ever-fruitful land,Where Æpy high, and little
Pteleon stand;Where beauteous Arene her structures shows,And Thryon’s walls
Alpheus’ streams inclose:And Dorion, famed for Thamyris’ disgrace,Superior once
of all the tuneful race,Till, vain of mortals’ empty praise, he stroveTo match
the seed of cloud-compelling Jove!Too daring bard! whose unsuccessful prideThe
immortal Muses in their art defied.The avenging Muses of the light of
dayDeprived his eyes, and snatch’d his voice away;No more his heavenly voice was
heard to sing,His hand no more awaked the silver string.Where under high
Cyllenè, crown’d with wood,The shaded tomb of old Æpytus stood;From Ripè,
Stratie, Tegea’s bordering towns,The Phenean fields, and Orchomenian downs,Where
the fat herds in plenteous pasture rove;And Stymphelus with her surrounding
grove;Parrhasia, on her snowy cliffs reclined,And high Enispè shook by wintry
wind,And fair Mantinea’s ever-pleasing site;In sixty sail the Arcadian bands
unite.Bold Agapenor, glorious at their head,(Ancæus’ son) the mighty squadron
led.Their ships, supplied by Agamemnon’s care,Through roaring seas the wondering
warriors bear;The first to battle on the appointed plain,But new to all the
dangers of the main.Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join;Whom Hyrmin, here,
and Myrsinus confine,And bounded there, where o’er the valleys roseThe Olenian
rock; and where Alisium flows;Beneath four chiefs (a numerous army) came:The
strength and glory of the Epean name.In separate squadrons these their train
divide,Each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide.One was Amphimachus, and
Thalpius one;(Eurytus’ this, and that Teätus’ son;)Diores sprung from
Amarynceus’ line;And great Polyxenus, of force divine.But those who view fair
Elis o’er the seasFrom the blest islands of the Echinades,In forty vessels under
Meges move,Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove:To strong Dulichium from his
sire he fled,And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led.Ulysses follow’d through
the watery road,A chief, in wisdom equal to a god.With those whom Cephalenia’s
line inclosed,Or till their fields along the coast opposed;Or where fair Ithaca
o’erlooks the floods,Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods,Where Ægilipa’s
rugged sides are seen,Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.These in twelve
galleys with vermilion prores,Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian
shores.Thoas came next, Andræmon’s valiant son,From Pleuron’s walls, and chalky
Calydon,And rough Pylene, and the Olenian steep,And Chalcis, beaten by the
rolling deep.He led the warriors from the Ætolian shore,For now the sons of
Œneus were no more!The glories of the mighty race were fled!Œneus himself, and
Meleager dead!To Thoas’ care now trust the martial train,His forty vessels
follow through the main.Next, eighty barks the Cretan king commands,Of Gnossus,
Lyctus, and Gortyna’s bands;And those who dwell where Rhytion’s domes arise,Or
white Lycastus glitters to the skies,Or where by Phæstus silver Jardan
runs;Crete’s hundred cities pour forth all her sons.These march’d, Idomeneus,
beneath thy care,And Merion, dreadful as the god of war.Tlepolemus, the son of
Hercules,Led nine swift vessels through the foamy seas,From Rhodes, with
everlasting sunshine bright,Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white.His captive
mother fierce Alcides boreFrom Ephyr’s walls and Sellè’s winding shore,Where
mighty towns in ruins spread the plain,And saw their blooming warriors early
slain.The hero, when to manly years he grew,Alcides’ uncle, old Licymnius,
slew;For this, constrain’d to quit his native place,And shun the vengeance of
the Herculean race,A fleet he built, and with a numerous trainOf willing exiles
wander’d o’er the main;Where, many seas and many sufferings past,On happy Rhodes
the chief arrived at last:There in three tribes divides his native band,And
rules them peaceful in a foreign land;Increased and prosper’d in their new
abodesBy mighty Jove, the sire of men and gods;With joy they saw the growing
empire rise,And showers of wealth descending from the skies.Three ships with
Nireus sought the Trojan shore,Nireus, whom Agäle to Charopus bore,Nireus, in
faultless shape and blooming grace,The loveliest youth of all the Grecian
race;[104]Pelides only match’d his early charms;But few his troops, and small
his strength in arms.Next thirty galleys cleave the liquid plain,Of those
Calydnæ’s sea-girt isles contain;With them the youth of Nisyrus repair,Casus the
strong, and Crapathus the fair;Cos, where Eurypylus possess’d the sway,Till
great Alcides made the realms obey:These Antiphus and bold Phidippus
bring,Sprung from the god by Thessalus the king.Now, Muse, recount Pelasgic
Argos’ powers,From Alos, Alopé, and Trechin’s towers:From Phthia’s spacious
vales; and Hella, bless’dWith female beauty far beyond the rest.Full fifty ships
beneath Achilles’ care,The Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenians bear;Thessalians all,
though various in their name;The same their nation, and their chief the same.But
now inglorious, stretch’d along the shore,They hear the brazen voice of war no
more;No more the foe they face in dire array:Close in his fleet the angry leader
lay;Since fair Briseïs from his arms was torn,The noblest spoil from sack’d
Lyrnessus borne,Then, when the chief the Theban walls o’erthrew,And the bold
sons of great Evenus slew.There mourn’d Achilles, plunged in depth of care,But
soon to rise in slaughter, blood, and war.To these the youth of Phylacè
succeed,Itona, famous for her fleecy breed,And grassy Pteleon deck’d with
cheerful greens,The bowers of Ceres, and the sylvan scenes.Sweet Pyrrhasus, with
blooming flowerets crown’d,And Antron’s watery dens, and cavern’d ground.These
own’d, as chief, Protesilas the brave,Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave:The
first who boldly touch’d the Trojan shore,And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian
gore;There lies, far distant from his native plain;Unfinish’d his proud palaces
remain,And his sad consort beats her breast in vain.His troops in forty ships
Podarces led,Iphiclus’ son, and brother to the dead;Nor he unworthy to command
the host;Yet still they mourn’d their ancient leader lost.The men who Glaphyra’s
fair soil partake,Where hills incircle Bœbe’s lowly lake,Where Phære hears the
neighbouring waters fall,Or proud Iölcus lifts her airy wall,In ten black ships
embark’d for Ilion’s shore,With bold Eumelus, whom Alcestè bore:All Pelias’ race
Alcestè far outshined,The grace and glory of the beauteous kind,The troops
Methonè or Thaumacia yields,Olizon’s rocks, or Melibœa’s fields,With Philoctetes
sail’d whose matchless artFrom the tough bow directs the feather’d dart.Seven
were his ships; each vessel fifty row,Skill’d in his science of the dart and
bow.But he lay raging on the Lemnian ground,A poisonous hydra gave the burning
wound;There groan’d the chief in agonizing pain,Whom Greece at length shall
wish, nor wish in vain.His forces Medon led from Lemnos’ shore,Oïleus’ son, whom
beauteous Rhena bore.The Œchalian race, in those high towers contain’dWhere once
Eurytus in proud triumph reign’d,Or where her humbler turrets Tricca rears,Or
where Ithome, rough with rocks, appears,In thirty sail the sparkling waves
divide,Which Podalirius and Machaon guide.To these his skill their parent-god
imparts,Divine professors of the healing arts.The bold Ormenian and Asterian
bandsIn forty barks Eurypylus commands.Where Titan hides his hoary head in
snow,And where Hyperia’s silver fountains flow.Thy troops, Argissa, Polypœtes
leads,And Eleon, shelter’d by Olympus’ shades,Gyrtonè’s warriors; and where
Orthè lies,And Oloösson’s chalky cliffs arise.Sprung from Pirithous of immortal
race,The fruit of fair Hippodame’s embrace,(That day, when hurl’d from Pelion’s
cloudy head,To distant dens the shaggy Centaurs fled)With Polypœtes join’d in
equal swayLeonteus leads, and forty ships obey.In twenty sail the bold
Perrhæbians cameFrom Cyphus, Guneus was their leader’s name.With these the
Enians join’d, and those who freezeWhere cold Dodona lifts her holy trees;Or
where the pleasing Titaresius glides,And into Peneus rolls his easy tides;Yet
o’er the silvery surface pure they flow,The sacred stream unmix’d with streams
below,Sacred and awful! from the dark abodesStyx pours them forth, the dreadful
oath of gods!Last, under Prothous the Magnesians stood,(Prothous the swift, of
old Tenthredon’s blood;)Who dwell where Pelion, crown’d with piny
boughs,Obscures the glade, and nods his shaggy brows;Or where through flowery
Tempe Peneus stray’d:(The region stretch’d beneath his mighty shade:)In forty
sable barks they stemm’d the main;Such were the chiefs, and such the Grecian
train.Say next, O Muse! of all Achaia breeds,Who bravest fought, or rein’d the
noblest steeds?Eumelus’ mares were foremost in the chase,As eagles fleet, and of
Pheretian race;Bred where Pieria’s fruitful fountains flow,And train’d by him
who bears the silver bow.Fierce in the fight their nostrils breathed a
flame,Their height, their colour, and their age the same;O’er fields of death
they whirl the rapid car,And break the ranks, and thunder through the war.Ajax
in arms the first renown acquired,While stern Achilles in his wrath retired:(His
was the strength that mortal might exceeds,And his the unrivall’d race of
heavenly steeds:)But Thetis’ son now shines in arms no more;His troops,
neglected on the sandy shore.In empty air their sportive javelins throw,Or whirl
the disk, or bend an idle bow:Unstain’d with blood his cover’d chariots
stand;The immortal coursers graze along the strand;But the brave chiefs the
inglorious life deplored,And, wandering o’er the camp, required their lord.Now,
like a deluge, covering all around,The shining armies sweep along the
ground;Swift as a flood of fire, when storms arise,Floats the wild field, and
blazes to the skies.Earth groan’d beneath them; as when angry JoveHurls down the
forky lightning from above,On Arimé when he the thunder throws,And fires Typhœus
with redoubled blows,Where Typhon, press’d beneath the burning load,Still feels
the fury of the avenging god.But various Iris, Jove’s commands to bear,Speeds on
the wings of winds through liquid air;In Priam’s porch the Trojan chiefs she
found,The old consulting, and the youths around.Polites’ shape, the monarch’s
son, she chose,Who from Æsetes’ tomb observed the foes,[105]High on the mound;
from whence in prospect layThe fields, the tents, the navy, and the bay.In this
dissembled form, she hastes to bringThe unwelcome message to the Phrygian
king.“Cease to consult, the time for action calls;War, horrid war, approaches to
your walls!Assembled armies oft have I beheld;But ne’er till now such numbers
charged a field:Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand,The moving squadrons
blacken all the strand.Thou, godlike Hector! all thy force employ,Assemble all
the united bands of Troy;In just array let every leader callThe foreign troops:
this day demands them all!”The voice divine the mighty chief alarms;The council
breaks, the warriors rush to arms.The gates unfolding pour forth all their
train,Nations on nations fill the dusky plain,Men, steeds, and chariots, shake
the trembling ground:The tumult thickens, and the skies resound.Amidst the
plain, in sight of Ilion, standsA rising mount, the work of human hands;(This
for Myrinne’s tomb the immortals know,Though call’d Bateïa in the world
below;)Beneath their chiefs in martial order here,The auxiliar troops and Trojan
hosts appear.The godlike Hector, high above the rest,Shakes his huge spear, and
nods his plumy crest:In throngs around his native bands repair,And groves of
lances glitter in the air.Divine Æneas brings the Dardan race,Anchises’ son, by
Venus’ stolen embrace,Born in the shades of Ida’s secret grove;(A mortal mixing
with the queen of love;)Archilochus and Acamas divideThe warrior’s toils, and
combat by his side.Who fair Zeleia’s wealthy valleys till,[106]Fast by the foot
of Ida’s sacred hill,Or drink, Æsepus, of thy sable flood,Were led by Pandarus,
of royal blood;To whom his art Apollo deign’d to show,Graced with the presents
of his shafts and bow.From rich Apæsus and Adrestia’s towers,High Teree’s
summits, and Pityea’s bowers;From these the congregated troops obeyYoung Amphius
and Adrastus’ equal sway;Old Merops’ sons; whom, skill’d in fates to come,The
sire forewarn’d, and prophesied their doom:Fate urged them on! the sire
forewarn’d in vain,They rush’d to war, and perish’d on the plain.From Practius’
stream, Percotè’s pasture lands,And Sestos and Abydos’ neighbouring strands,From
great Arisba’s walls and Sellè’s coast,Asius Hyrtacides conducts his host:High
on his car he shakes the flowing reins,His fiery coursers thunder o’er the
plains.The fierce Pelasgi next, in war renown’d,March from Larissa’s
ever-fertile ground:In equal arms their brother leaders shine,Hippothous bold,
and Pyleus the divine.Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their hosts,In dread array,
from Thracia’s wintry coasts;Round the bleak realms where Hellespontus roars,And
Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding shores.With great Euphemus the Ciconians
move,Sprung from Trœzenian Ceüs, loved by Jove.Pyræchmes the Pæonian troops
attend,Skill’d in the fight their crooked bows to bend;From Axius’ ample bed he
leads them on,Axius, that laves the distant Amydon,Axius, that swells with all
his neighbouring rills,And wide around the floating region fills.The
Paphlagonians Pylæmenes rules,Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules,Where
Erythinus’ rising cliffs are seen,Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green,And
where Ægialus and Cromna lie,And lofty Sesamus invades the sky,And where
Parthenius, roll’d through banks of flowers,Reflects her bordering palaces and
bowers.Here march’d in arms the Halizonian band,Whom Odius and Epistrophus
command,From those far regions where the sun refinesThe ripening silver in
Alybean mines.There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train,And augur Ennomus,
inspired in vain;For stern Achilles lopp’d his sacred head,Roll’d down Scamander
with the vulgar dead.Phorcys and brave Ascanius here uniteThe Ascanian
Phrygians, eager for the fight.Of those who round Mæonia’s realms reside,Or whom
the vales in shades of Tmolus hide,Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake,Born
on the banks of Gyges’ silent lake.There, from the fields where wild Mæander
flows,High Mycale, and Latmos’ shady brows,And proud Miletus, came the Carian
throngs,With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.[107]Amphimachus and
Naustes guide the train,Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain,Who, trick’d with
gold, and glittering on his car,Rode like a woman to the field of war.Fool that
he was! by fierce Achilles slain,The river swept him to the briny main:There
whelm’d with waves the gaudy warrior liesThe valiant victor seized the golden
prize.The forces last in fair array succeed,Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon
leadThe warlike bands that distant Lycia yields,Where gulfy Xanthus foams along
the fields.BOOK III.ARGUMENT.THE DUEL OF MENELAUS AND PARIS.The armies being
ready to engage, a single combat is agreed uponbetween Menelaus and Paris (by
the intervention of Hector) for thedetermination of the war. Iris is sent to
call Helen to behold thefight. She leads her to the walls of Troy, where Priam
sat with hiscounsellers observing the Grecian leaders on the plain below, to
whomHelen gives an account of the chief of them. The kings on either parttake
the solemn oath for the conditions of the combat. The duel ensues;wherein Paris
being overcome, he is snatched away in a cloud by Venus,and transported to his
apartment. She then calls Helen from the walls,and brings the lovers together.
Agamemnon, on the part of the Grecians,demands the restoration of Helen, and the
performance of the articles. The three-and-twentieth day still continues
throughout this book. The scene is sometimes in the fields before Troy, and
sometimes in Troy itself.Thus by their leaders’ care each martial bandMoves into
ranks, and stretches o’er the land.With shouts the Trojans, rushing from
afar,Proclaim their motions, and provoke the war.So when inclement winters vex
the plainWith piercing frosts, or thick-descending rain,To warmer seas the
cranes embodied fly,[108]With noise, and order, through the midway sky;To pigmy
nations wounds and death they bring,And all the war descends upon the wing,But
silent, breathing rage, resolved and skill’d[109]By mutual aids to fix a
doubtful field,Swift march the Greeks: the rapid dust aroundDarkening arises
from the labour’d ground.Thus from his flaggy wings when Notus shedsA night of
vapours round the mountain heads,Swift-gliding mists the dusky fields invade,To
thieves more grateful than the midnight shade;While scarce the swains their
feeding flocks survey,Lost and confused amidst the thicken’d day:So wrapp’d in
gathering dust, the Grecian train,A moving cloud, swept on, and hid the
plain.Now front to front the hostile armies stand,Eager of fight, and only wait
command;When, to the van, before the sons of fameWhom Troy sent forth, the
beauteous Paris came:In form a god! the panther’s speckled hideFlow’d o’er his
armour with an easy pride:His bended bow across his shoulders flung,His sword
beside him negligently hung;Two pointed spears he shook with gallant grace,And
dared the bravest of the Grecian race.As thus, with glorious air and proud
disdain,He boldly stalk’d, the foremost on the plain,Him Menelaus, loved of
Mars, espies,With heart elated, and with joyful eyes:So joys a lion, if the
branching deer,Or mountain goat, his bulky prize, appear;Eager he seizes and
devours the slain,Press’d by bold youths and baying dogs in vain.Thus fond of
vengeance, with a furious bound,In clanging arms he leaps upon the groundFrom
his high chariot: him, approaching near,The beauteous champion views with marks
of fear,Smit with a conscious sense, retires behind,And shuns the fate he well
deserved to find.As when some shepherd, from the rustling trees[110]Shot forth
to view, a scaly serpent sees,Trembling and pale, he starts with wild
affrightAnd all confused precipitates his flight:So from the king the shining
warrior flies,And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies.As godlike Hector sees
the prince retreat,He thus upbraids him with a generous heat:“Unhappy
Paris![111] but to women brave!So fairly form’d, and only to deceive!Oh, hadst
thou died when first thou saw’st the light,Or died at least before thy nuptial
rite!A better fate than vainly thus to boast,And fly, the scandal of thy Trojan
host.Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to seeTheir fears of danger undeceived
in thee!Thy figure promised with a martial air,But ill thy soul supplies a form
so fair.In former days, in all thy gallant pride,When thy tall ships triumphant
stemm’d the tide,When Greece beheld thy painted canvas flow,And crowds stood
wondering at the passing show,Say, was it thus, with such a baffled mien,You met
the approaches of the Spartan queen,Thus from her realm convey’d the beauteous
prize,And both her warlike lords outshined in Helen’s eyes?This deed, thy foes’
delight, thy own disgrace,Thy father’s grief, and ruin of thy race;This deed
recalls thee to the proffer’d fight;Or hast thou injured whom thou dar’st not
right?Soon to thy cost the field would make thee knowThou keep’st the consort of
a braver foe.Thy graceful form instilling soft desire,Thy curling tresses, and
thy silver lyre,Beauty and youth; in vain to these you trust,When youth and
beauty shall be laid in dust:Troy yet may wake, and one avenging blowCrush the
dire author of his country’s woe.”His silence here, with blushes, Paris
breaks:“’Tis just, my brother, what your anger speaks:But who like thee can
boast a soul sedate,So firmly proof to all the shocks of fate?Thy force, like
steel, a temper’d hardness shows,Still edged to wound, and still untired with
blows,Like steel, uplifted by some strenuous swain,With falling woods to strew
the wasted plain.Thy gifts I praise; nor thou despise the charmsWith which a
lover golden Venus arms;Soft moving speech, and pleasing outward show,No wish
can gain them, but the gods bestow.Yet, would’st thou have the proffer’d combat
stand,The Greeks and Trojans seat on either hand;Then let a midway space our
hosts divide,And, on that stage of war, the cause be tried:By Paris there the
Spartan king be fought,For beauteous Helen and the wealth she brought;And who
his rival can in arms subdue,His be the fair, and his the treasure too.Thus with
a lasting league your toils may cease,And Troy possess her fertile fields in
peace;Thus may the Greeks review their native shore,Much famed for generous
steeds, for beauty more.”He said. The challenge Hector heard with joy,Then with
his spear restrain’d the youth of Troy,Held by the midst, athwart; and near the
foeAdvanced with steps majestically slow:While round his dauntless head the
Grecians pourTheir stones and arrows in a mingled shower.Then thus the monarch,
great Atrides, cried:“Forbear, ye warriors! lay the darts aside:A parley Hector
asks, a message bears;We know him by the various plume he wears.”Awed by his
high command the Greeks attend,The tumult silence, and the fight suspend.While
from the centre Hector rolls his eyesOn either host, and thus to both
applies:“Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,What Paris, author of the
war, demands.Your shining swords within the sheath restrain,And pitch your
lances in the yielding plain.Here in the midst, in either army’s sight,He dares
the Spartan king to single fight;And wills that Helen and the ravish’d
spoil,That caused the contest, shall reward the toil.Let these the brave
triumphant victor grace,And different nations part in leagues of peace.”He
spoke: in still suspense on either sideEach army stood: the Spartan chief
replied:“Me too, ye warriors, hear, whose fatal rightA world engages in the
toils of fight.To me the labour of the field resign;Me Paris injured; all the
war be mine.Fall he that must, beneath his rival’s arms;And live the rest,
secure of future harms.Two lambs, devoted by your country’s rite,To earth a
sable, to the sun a white,Prepare, ye Trojans! while a third we bringSelect to
Jove, the inviolable king.Let reverend Priam in the truce engage,And add the
sanction of considerate age;His sons are faithless, headlong in debate,And youth
itself an empty wavering state;Cool age advances, venerably wise,Turns on all
hands its deep-discerning eyes;Sees what befell, and what may yet
befall,Concludes from both, and best provides for all.The nations hear with
rising hopes possess’d,And peaceful prospects dawn in every breast.Within the
lines they drew their steeds around,And from their chariots issued on the
ground;Next, all unbuckling the rich mail they wore,Laid their bright arms along
the sable shore.On either side the meeting hosts are seenWith lances fix’d, and
close the space between.Two heralds now, despatch’d to Troy, inviteThe Phrygian
monarch to the peaceful rite.Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bringThe lamb
for Jove, the inviolable king.Meantime to beauteous Helen, from the skiesThe
various goddess of the rainbow flies:(Like fair Laodice in form and face,The
loveliest nymph of Priam’s royal race:)Her in the palace, at her loom she
found;The golden web her own sad story crown’d,The Trojan wars she weaved
(herself the prize)And the dire triumphs of her fatal eyes.To whom the goddess
of the painted bow:“Approach, and view the wondrous scene below![112]Each hardy
Greek, and valiant Trojan knight,So dreadful late, and furious for the fight,Now
rest their spears, or lean upon their shields;Ceased is the war, and silent all
the fields.Paris alone and Sparta’s king advance,In single fight to toss the
beamy lance;Each met in arms, the fate of combat tries,Thy love the motive, and
thy charms the prize.”This said, the many-coloured maid inspiresHer husband’s
love, and wakes her former fires;Her country, parents, all that once were
dear,Rush to her thought, and force a tender tear,O’er her fair face a snowy
veil she threw,And, softly sighing, from the loom withdrew.Her handmaids,
Clymene and Æthra, waitHer silent footsteps to the Scæan gate.There sat the
seniors of the Trojan race:(Old Priam’s chiefs, and most in Priam’s grace,)The
king the first; Thymœtes at his side;Lampus and Clytius, long in council
tried;Panthus, and Hicetaon, once the strong;And next, the wisest of the
reverend throng,Antenor grave, and sage Ucalegon,Lean’d on the walls and bask’d
before the sun:Chiefs, who no more in bloody fights engage,But wise through
time, and narrative with age,In summer days, like grasshoppers rejoice,A
bloodless race, that send a feeble voice.These, when the Spartan queen
approach’d the tower,In secret own’d resistless beauty’s power:They cried, “No
wonder[113] such celestial charmsFor nine long years have set the world in
arms;What winning graces! what majestic mien!She moves a goddess, and she looks
a queen!Yet hence, O Heaven, convey that fatal face,And from destruction save
the Trojan race.”The good old Priam welcomed her, and cried,“Approach, my child,
and grace thy father’s side.See on the plain thy Grecian spouse appears,The
friends and kindred of thy former years.No crime of thine our present sufferings
draws,Not thou, but Heaven’s disposing will, the causeThe gods these armies and
this force employ,The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy.But lift thy eyes,
and say, what Greek is he(Far as from hence these aged orbs can see)Around whose
brow such martial graces shine,So tall, so awful, and almost divine!Though some
of larger stature tread the green,None match his grandeur and exalted mien:He
seems a monarch, and his country’s pride.”Thus ceased the king, and thus the
fair replied:“Before thy presence, father, I appear,With conscious shame and
reverential fear.Ah! had I died, ere to these walls I fled,False to my country,
and my nuptial bed;My brothers, friends, and daughter left behind,False to them
all, to Paris only kind!For this I mourn, till grief or dire diseaseShall waste
the form whose fault it was to please!The king of kings, Atrides, you
survey,Great in the war, and great in arts of sway:My brother once, before my
days of shame!And oh! that still he bore a brother’s name!”With wonder Priam
view’d the godlike man,Extoll’d the happy prince, and thus began:“O bless’d
Atrides! born to prosperous fate,Successful monarch of a mighty state!How vast
thy empire! Of your matchless trainWhat numbers lost, what numbers yet remain!In
Phrygia once were gallant armies known,In ancient time, when Otreus fill’d the
throne,When godlike Mygdon led their troops of horse,And I, to join them, raised
the Trojan force:Against the manlike Amazons we stood,[114]And Sangar’s stream
ran purple with their blood.But far inferior those, in martial grace,And
strength of numbers, to this Grecian race.”This said, once more he view’d the
warrior train;“What’s he, whose arms lie scatter’d on the plain?Broad is his
breast, his shoulders larger spread,Though great Atrides overtops his head.Nor
yet appear his care and conduct small;From rank to rank he moves, and orders
all.The stately ram thus measures o’er the ground,And, master of the flock,
surveys them round.”Then Helen thus: “Whom your discerning eyesHave singled out,
is Ithacus the wise;A barren island boasts his glorious birth;His fame for
wisdom fills the spacious earth.”Antenor took the word, and thus
began:[115]“Myself, O king! have seen that wondrous manWhen, trusting Jove and
hospitable laws,To Troy he came, to plead the Grecian cause;(Great Menelaus
urged the same request;)My house was honour’d with each royal guest:I knew their
persons, and admired their parts,Both brave in arms, and both approved in
arts.Erect, the Spartan most engaged our view;Ulysses seated, greater reverence
drew.When Atreus’ son harangued the listening train,Just was his sense, and his
expression plain,His words succinct, yet full, without a fault;He spoke no more
than just the thing he ought.But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,[116]His
modest eyes he fix’d upon the ground;As one unskill’d or dumb, he seem’d to
stand,Nor raised his head, nor stretch’d his sceptred hand;But, when he speaks,
what elocution flows!Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,[117]The copious
accents fall, with easy art;Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!Wondering
we hear, and fix’d in deep surprise,Our ears refute the censure of our eyes.”The
king then ask’d (as yet the camp he view’d)“What chief is that, with giant
strength endued,Whose brawny shoulders, and whose swelling chest,And lofty
stature, far exceed the rest?“Ajax the great, (the beauteous queen
replied,)Himself a host: the Grecian strength and pride.See! bold Idomeneus
superior towersAmid yon circle of his Cretan powers,Great as a god! I saw him
once before,With Menelaus on the Spartan shore.The rest I know, and could in
order name;All valiant chiefs, and men of mighty fame.Yet two are wanting of the
numerous train,Whom long my eyes have sought, but sought in vain:Castor and
Pollux, first in martial force,One bold on foot, and one renown’d for horse.My
brothers these; the same our native shore,One house contain’d us, as one mother
bore.Perhaps the chiefs, from warlike toils at ease,For distant Troy refused to
sail the seas;Perhaps their swords some nobler quarrel draws,Ashamed to combat
in their sister’s cause.”So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothers’
doom;[118]Wrapt in the cold embraces of the tomb;Adorn’d with honours in their
native shore,Silent they slept, and heard of wars no more.Meantime the heralds,
through the crowded town,Bring the rich wine and destined victims down.Idæus’
arms the golden goblets press’d,[119]Who thus the venerable king
address’d:“Arise, O father of the Trojan state!The nations call, thy joyful
people waitTo seal the truce, and end the dire debate.Paris, thy son, and
Sparta’s king advance,In measured lists to toss the weighty lance;And who his
rival shall in arms subdue,His be the dame, and his the treasure too.Thus with a
lasting league our toils may cease,And Troy possess her fertile fields in
peace:So shall the Greeks review their native shore,Much famed for generous
steeds, for beauty more.”With grief he heard, and bade the chiefs prepareTo join
his milk-white coursers to the car;He mounts the seat, Antenor at his side;The
gentle steeds through Scæa’s gates they guide:[120]Next from the car descending
on the plain,Amid the Grecian host and Trojan train,Slow they proceed: the sage
Ulysses thenArose, and with him rose the king of men.On either side a sacred
herald stands,The wine they mix, and on each monarch’s handsPour the full urn;
then draws the Grecian lordHis cutlass sheathed beside his ponderous sword;From
the sign’d victims crops the curling hair;[121]The heralds part it, and the
princes share;Then loudly thus before the attentive bandsHe calls the gods, and
spreads his lifted hands:“O first and greatest power! whom all obey,Who high on
Ida’s holy mountain sway,Eternal Jove! and you bright orb that rollFrom east to
west, and view from pole to pole!Thou mother Earth! and all ye living
floods!Infernal furies, and Tartarean gods,Who rule the dead, and horrid woes
prepareFor perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!Hear, and be witness. If,
by Paris slain,Great Menelaus press the fatal plain;The dame and treasures let
the Trojan keep,And Greece returning plough the watery deep.If by my brother’s
lance the Trojan bleed,Be his the wealth and beauteous dame decreed:The
appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,And every age record the signal day.This if
the Phrygians shall refuse to yield,Arms must revenge, and Mars decide the
field.”With that the chief the tender victims slew,And in the dust their
bleeding bodies threw;The vital spirit issued at the wound,And left the members
quivering on the ground.From the same urn they drink the mingled wine,And add
libations to the powers divine.While thus their prayers united mount the
sky,“Hear, mighty Jove! and hear, ye gods on high!And may their blood, who first
the league confound,Shed like this wine, disdain the thirsty ground;May all
their consorts serve promiscuous lust,And all their lust be scatter’d as the
dust!”Thus either host their imprecations join’d,Which Jove refused, and mingled
with the wind.The rites now finish’d, reverend Priam rose,And thus express’d a
heart o’ercharged with woes:“Ye Greeks and Trojans, let the chiefs engage,But
spare the weakness of my feeble age:In yonder walls that object let me shun,Nor
view the danger of so dear a son.Whose arms shall conquer and what prince shall
fall,Heaven only knows; for heaven disposes all.”This said, the hoary king no
longer stay’d,But on his car the slaughter’d victims laid:Then seized the reins
his gentle steeds to guide,And drove to Troy, Antenor at his side.Bold Hector
and Ulysses now disposeThe lists of combat, and the ground inclose:Next to
decide, by sacred lots prepare,Who first shall launch his pointed spear in
air.The people pray with elevated hands,And words like these are heard through
all the bands:“Immortal Jove, high Heaven’s superior lord,On lofty Ida’s holy
mount adored!Whoe’er involved us in this dire debate,O give that author of the
war to fateAnd shades eternal! let division cease,And joyful nations join in
leagues of peace.”With eyes averted Hector hastes to turnThe lots of fight and
shakes the brazen urn.Then, Paris, thine leap’d forth; by fatal chanceOrdain’d
the first to whirl the weighty lance.Both armies sat the combat to survey.Beside
each chief his azure armour lay,And round the lists the generous coursers
neigh.The beauteous warrior now arrays for fight,In gilded arms magnificently
bright:The purple cuishes clasp his thighs around,With flowers adorn’d, with
silver buckles bound:Lycaon’s corslet his fair body dress’d,Braced in and fitted
to his softer breast;A radiant baldric, o’er his shoulder tied,Sustain’d the
sword that glitter’d at his side:His youthful face a polish’d helm
o’erspread;The waving horse-hair nodded on his head:His figured shield, a
shining orb, he takes,And in his hand a pointed javelin shakes.With equal speed
and fired by equal charms,The Spartan hero sheathes his limbs in arms.Now round
the lists the admiring armies stand,With javelins fix’d, the Greek and Trojan
band.Amidst the dreadful vale, the chiefs advance,All pale with rage, and shake
the threatening lance.The Trojan first his shining javelin threw;Full on
Atrides’ ringing shield it flew,Nor pierced the brazen orb, but with a
bound[122]Leap’d from the buckler, blunted, on the ground.Atrides then his massy
lance prepares,In act to throw, but first prefers his prayers:“Give me, great
Jove! to punish lawless lust,And lay the Trojan gasping in the dust:Destroy the
aggressor, aid my righteous cause,Avenge the breach of hospitable laws!Let this
example future times reclaim,And guard from wrong fair friendship’s holy
name,”He said, and poised in air the javelin sent,Through Paris’ shield the
forceful weapon went,His corslet pierces, and his garment rends,And glancing
downward, near his flank descends.The wary Trojan, bending from the blow,Eludes
the death, and disappoints his foe:But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and
strookFull on his casque: the crested helmet shook;The brittle steel, unfaithful
to his hand,Broke short: the fragments glitter’d on the sand.The raging warrior
to the spacious skiesRaised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes:“Then is it vain
in Jove himself to trust?And is it thus the gods assist the just?When crimes
provoke us, Heaven success denies;The dart falls harmless, and the falchion
flies.”Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew(Seized by the crest) the
unhappy warrior drew;Struggling he followed, while the embroider’d thongThat
tied his helmet, dragg’d the chief along.Then had his ruin crown’d Atrides’
joy,But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy:Unseen she came, and burst the
golden band;And left an empty helmet in his hand.The casque, enraged, amidst the
Greeks he threw;The Greeks with smiles the polish’d trophy view.Then, as once
more he lifts the deadly dart,In thirst of vengeance, at his rival’s heart;The
queen of love her favour’d champion shrouds(For gods can all things) in a veil
of clouds.Raised from the field the panting youth she led,And gently laid him on
the bridal bed,With pleasing sweets his fainting sense renews,And all the dome
perfumes with heavenly dews.Meantime the brightest of the female kind,The
matchless Helen, o’er the walls reclined;To her, beset with Trojan beauties,
came,In borrow’d form, the laughter-loving dame.(She seem’d an ancient maid,
well-skill’d to cullThe snowy fleece, and wind the twisted wool.)The goddess
softly shook her silken vest,That shed perfumes, and whispering thus
address’d:[Illustration: ] VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER
OFPARIS“Haste, happy nymph! for thee thy Paris calls,Safe from the fight, in
yonder lofty walls,Fair as a god; with odours round him spread,He lies, and
waits thee on the well-known bed;Not like a warrior parted from the foe,But some
gay dancer in the public show.”She spoke, and Helen’s secret soul was moved;She
scorn’d the champion, but the man she loved.Fair Venus’ neck, her eyes that
sparkled fire,And breast, reveal’d the queen of soft desire.[123]Struck with her
presence, straight the lively redForsook her cheek; and trembling, thus she
said:“Then is it still thy pleasure to deceive?And woman’s frailty always to
believe!Say, to new nations must I cross the main,Or carry wars to some soft
Asian plain?For whom must Helen break her second vow?What other Paris is thy
darling now?Left to Atrides, (victor in the strife,)An odious conquest and a
captive wife,Hence let me sail; and if thy Paris bearMy absence ill, let Venus
ease his care.A handmaid goddess at his side to wait,Renounce the glories of thy
heavenly state,Be fix’d for ever to the Trojan shore,His spouse, or slave; and
mount the skies no more.For me, to lawless love no longer led,I scorn the
coward, and detest his bed;Else should I merit everlasting shame,And keen
reproach, from every Phrygian dame:Ill suits it now the joys of love to know,Too
deep my anguish, and too wild my woe.”[Illustration: ] VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO
PARISThen thus incensed, the Paphian queen replies:“Obey the power from whom thy
glories rise:Should Venus leave thee, every charm must fly,Fade from thy cheek,
and languish in thy eye.Cease to provoke me, lest I make thee moreThe world’s
aversion, than their love before;Now the bright prize for which mankind
engage,Than, the sad victim, of the public rage.”At this, the fairest of her sex
obey’d,And veil’d her blushes in a silken shade;Unseen, and silent, from the
train she moves,Led by the goddess of the Smiles and Loves.Arrived, and enter’d
at the palace gate,The maids officious round their mistress wait;Then, all
dispersing, various tasks attend;The queen and goddess to the prince ascend.Full
in her Paris’ sight, the queen of loveHad placed the beauteous progeny of
Jove;Where, as he view’d her charms, she turn’d awayHer glowing eyes, and thus
began to say:“Is this the chief, who, lost to sense of shame,Late fled the
field, and yet survives his fame?O hadst thou died beneath the righteous swordOf
that brave man whom once I call’d my lord!The boaster Paris oft desired the
dayWith Sparta’s king to meet in single fray:Go now, once more thy rival’s rage
excite,Provoke Atrides, and renew the fight:Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou
unskill’dShouldst fall an easy conquest on the field.”The prince replies: “Ah
cease, divinely fair,Nor add reproaches to the wounds I bear;This day the foe
prevail’d by Pallas’ power:We yet may vanquish in a happier hour:There want not
gods to favour us above;But let the business of our life be love:These softer
moments let delights employ,And kind embraces snatch the hasty joy.Not thus I
loved thee, when from Sparta’s shoreMy forced, my willing heavenly prize I
bore,When first entranced in Cranae’s isle I lay,[124]Mix’d with thy soul, and
all dissolved away!”Thus having spoke, the enamour’d Phrygian boyRush’d to the
bed, impatient for the joy.Him Helen follow’d slow with bashful charms,And
clasp’d the blooming hero in her arms.While these to love’s delicious rapture
yield,The stern Atrides rages round the field:So some fell lion whom the woods
obey,Roars through the desert, and demands his prey.Paris he seeks, impatient to
destroy,But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy;Even those had yielded to a
foe so braveThe recreant warrior, hateful as the grave.Then speaking thus, the
king of kings arose,“Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes!Hear and attest!
from Heaven with conquest crown’d,Our brother’s arms the just success have
found:Be therefore now the Spartan wealth restor’d,Let Argive Helen own her
lawful lord;The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,And age to age record this
signal day.”He ceased; his army’s loud applauses rise,And the long shout runs
echoing through the skies.[Illustration: ] VENUS[Illustration: ] Map, titled
“GRÆCIÆ ANTIQUÆ”BOOK IV.ARGUMENT.THE BREACH OF THE TRUCE, AND THE FIRST
BATTLE.The gods deliberate in council concerning the Trojan war: they agreeupon
the continuation of it, and Jupiter sends down Minerva to breakthe truce. She
persuades Pandarus to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who iswounded, but cured by
Machaon. In the meantime some of the Trojantroops attack the Greeks. Agamemnon
is distinguished in all the partsof a good general; he reviews the troops, and
exhorts the leaders, someby praises and others by reproof. Nestor is
particularly celebrated forhis military discipline. The battle joins, and great
numbers are slainon both sides. The same day continues through this as through
the last book (as it does also through the two following, and almost to the end
of the seventh book). The scene is wholly in the field before Troy.And now
Olympus’ shining gates unfold;The gods, with Jove, assume their thrones of
gold:Immortal Hebe, fresh with bloom divine,The golden goblet crowns with purple
wine:While the full bowls flow round, the powers employTheir careful eyes on
long-contended Troy.When Jove, disposed to tempt Saturnia’s spleen,Thus waked
the fury of his partial queen,“Two powers divine the son of Atreus aid,Imperial
Juno, and the martial maid;[125]But high in heaven they sit, and gaze from
far,The tame spectators of his deeds of war.Not thus fair Venus helps her
favour’d knight,The queen of pleasures shares the toils of fight,Each danger
wards, and constant in her care,Saves in the moment of the last despair.Her act
has rescued Paris’ forfeit life,Though great Atrides gain’d the glorious
strife.Then say, ye powers! what signal issue waitsTo crown this deed, and
finish all the fates!Shall Heaven by peace the bleeding kingdoms spare,Or rouse
the furies, and awake the war?Yet, would the gods for human good provide,Atrides
soon might gain his beauteous bride,Still Priam’s walls in peaceful honours
grow,And through his gates the crowding nations flow.”Thus while he spoke, the
queen of heaven, enraged,And queen of war, in close consult engaged:Apart they
sit, their deep designs employ,And meditate the future woes of Troy.Though
secret anger swell’d Minerva’s breast,The prudent goddess yet her wrath
suppress’d;But Juno, impotent of passion, brokeHer sullen silence, and with fury
spoke:[Illustration: ] THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS“Shall then, O tyrant of the
ethereal reign!My schemes, my labours, and my hopes be vain?Have I, for this,
shook Ilion with alarms,Assembled nations, set two worlds in arms?To spread the
war, I flew from shore to shore;The immortal coursers scarce the labour bore.At
length ripe vengeance o’er their heads impends,But Jove himself the faithless
race defends.Loth as thou art to punish lawless lust,Not all the gods are
partial and unjust.”The sire whose thunder shakes the cloudy skies,Sighs from
his inmost soul, and thus replies:“Oh lasting rancour! oh insatiate hateTo
Phrygia’s monarch, and the Phrygian state!What high offence has fired the wife
of Jove?Can wretched mortals harm the powers above,That Troy, and Troy’s whole
race thou wouldst confound,And yon fair structures level with the ground!Haste,
leave the skies, fulfil thy stern desire,Burst all her gates, and wrap her walls
in fire!Let Priam bleed! if yet you thirst for more,Bleed all his sons, and
Ilion float with gore:To boundless vengeance the wide realm be given,Till vast
destruction glut the queen of heaven!So let it be, and Jove his peace
enjoy,[126]When heaven no longer hears the name of Troy.But should this arm
prepare to wreak our hateOn thy loved realms, whose guilt demands their
fate;Presume not thou the lifted bolt to stay,Remember Troy, and give the
vengeance way.For know, of all the numerous towns that riseBeneath the rolling
sun and starry skies,Which gods have raised, or earth-born men enjoy,None stands
so dear to Jove as sacred Troy.No mortals merit more distinguish’d graceThan
godlike Priam, or than Priam’s race.Still to our name their hecatombs expire,And
altars blaze with unextinguish’d fire.”At this the goddess rolled her radiant
eyes,Then on the Thunderer fix’d them, and replies:“Three towns are Juno’s on
the Grecian plains,More dear than all the extended earth contains,Mycenæ, Argos,
and the Spartan wall;[127]These thou mayst raze, nor I forbid their fall:’Tis
not in me the vengeance to remove;The crime’s sufficient that they share my
love.Of power superior why should I complain?Resent I may, but must resent in
vain.Yet some distinction Juno might require,Sprung with thyself from one
celestial sire,A goddess born, to share the realms above,And styled the consort
of the thundering Jove;Nor thou a wife and sister’s right deny;[128]Let both
consent, and both by terms comply;So shall the gods our joint decrees obey,And
heaven shall act as we direct the way.See ready Pallas waits thy high commandsTo
raise in arms the Greek and Phrygian bands;Their sudden friendship by her arts
may cease,And the proud Trojans first infringe the peace.”The sire of men and
monarch of the skyThe advice approved, and bade Minerva fly,Dissolve the league,
and all her arts employTo make the breach the faithless act of Troy.Fired with
the charge, she headlong urged her flight,And shot like lightning from Olympus’
height.As the red comet, from Saturnius sentTo fright the nations with a dire
portent,(A fatal sign to armies on the plain,Or trembling sailors on the wintry
main,)With sweeping glories glides along in air,And shakes the sparkles from its
blazing hair:[129]Between both armies thus, in open sightShot the bright goddess
in a trail of light,With eyes erect the gazing hosts admireThe power descending,
and the heavens on fire!“The gods (they cried), the gods this signal sent,And
fate now labours with some vast event:Jove seals the league, or bloodier scenes
prepares;Jove, the great arbiter of peace and wars.”They said, while Pallas
through the Trojan throng,(In shape a mortal,) pass’d disguised along.Like bold
Laodocus, her course she bent,Who from Antenor traced his high descent.Amidst
the ranks Lycaon’s son she found,The warlike Pandarus, for strength
renown’d;Whose squadrons, led from black Æsepus’ flood,[130]With flaming shields
in martial circle stood.To him the goddess: “Phrygian! canst thou hearA
well-timed counsel with a willing ear?What praise were thine, couldst thou
direct thy dart,Amidst his triumph, to the Spartan’s heart?What gifts from Troy,
from Paris wouldst thou gain,Thy country’s foe, the Grecian glory slain?Then
seize the occasion, dare the mighty deed,Aim at his breast, and may that aim
succeed!But first, to speed the shaft, address thy vowTo Lycian Phœbus with the
silver bow,And swear the firstlings of thy flock to pay,On Zelia’s altars, to
the god of day.”[131]He heard, and madly at the motion pleased,His polish’d bow
with hasty rashness seized.’Twas form’d of horn, and smooth’d with artful toil:A
mountain goat resign’d the shining spoil.Who pierced long since beneath his
arrows bled;The stately quarry on the cliffs lay dead,And sixteen palms his
brow’s large honours spread:The workmen join’d, and shaped the bended horns,And
beaten gold each taper point adorns.This, by the Greeks unseen, the warrior
bends,Screen’d by the shields of his surrounding friends:There meditates the
mark; and couching low,Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow.One from a
hundred feather’d deaths he chose,Fated to wound, and cause of future woes;Then
offers vows with hecatombs to crownApollo’s altars in his native town.Now with
full force the yielding horn he bends,Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling
ends;Close to his breast he strains the nerve below,Till the barb’d points
approach the circling bow;The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing;Sounds the
tough horn, and twangs the quivering string.But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous
hourThe gods forget not, nor thy guardian power,Pallas assists, and (weakened in
its force)Diverts the weapon from its destined course:So from her babe, when
slumber seals his eye,The watchful mother wafts the envenom’d fly.Just where his
belt with golden buckles join’d,Where linen folds the double corslet lined,She
turn’d the shaft, which, hissing from above,Pass’d the broad belt, and through
the corslet drove;The folds it pierced, the plaited linen tore,And razed the
skin, and drew the purple gore.As when some stately trappings are decreedTo
grace a monarch on his bounding steed,A nymph in Caria or Mæonia bred,Stains the
pure ivory with a lively red;With equal lustre various colours vie,The shining
whiteness, and the Tyrian dye:So great Atrides! show’d thy sacred blood,As down
thy snowy thigh distill’d the streaming flood.With horror seized, the king of
men descriedThe shaft infix’d, and saw the gushing tide:Nor less the Spartan
fear’d, before he foundThe shining barb appear above the wound,Then, with a
sigh, that heaved his manly breast,The royal brother thus his grief
express’d,And grasp’d his hand; while all the Greeks aroundWith answering sighs
return’d the plaintive sound.“Oh, dear as life! did I for this agreeThe solemn
truce, a fatal truce to thee!Wert thou exposed to all the hostile train,To fight
for Greece, and conquer, to be slain!The race of Trojans in thy ruin join,And
faith is scorn’d by all the perjured line.Not thus our vows, confirm’d with wine
and gore,Those hands we plighted, and those oaths we swore,Shall all be vain:
when Heaven’s revenge is slow,Jove but prepares to strike the fiercer blow.The
day shall come, that great avenging day,When Troy’s proud glories in the dust
shall lay,When Priam’s powers and Priam’s self shall fall,And one prodigious
ruin swallow all.I see the god, already, from the poleBare his red arm, and bid
the thunder roll;I see the Eternal all his fury shed,And shake his ægis o’er
their guilty head.Such mighty woes on perjured princes wait;But thou, alas!
deserv’st a happier fate.Still must I mourn the period of thy days,And only
mourn, without my share of praise?Deprived of thee, the heartless Greeks no
moreShall dream of conquests on the hostile shore;Troy seized of Helen, and our
glory lost,Thy bones shall moulder on a foreign coast;While some proud Trojan
thus insulting cries,(And spurns the dust where Menelaus lies,)‘Such are the
trophies Greece from Ilion brings,And such the conquest of her king of kings!Lo
his proud vessels scatter’d o’er the main,And unrevenged, his mighty brother
slain.’Oh! ere that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,O’erwhelm me, earth! and
hide a monarch’s shame.”He said: a leader’s and a brother’s fearsPossess his
soul, which thus the Spartan cheers:“Let not thy words the warmth of Greece
abate;The feeble dart is guiltless of my fate:Stiff with the rich embroider’d
work around,My varied belt repell’d the flying wound.”To whom the king: “My
brother and my friend,Thus, always thus, may Heaven thy life defend!Now seek
some skilful hand, whose powerful artMay stanch the effusion, and extract the
dart.Herald, be swift, and bid Machaon bringHis speedy succour to the Spartan
king;Pierced with a winged shaft (the deed of Troy),The Grecian’s sorrow, and
the Dardan’s joy.”With hasty zeal the swift Talthybius flies;Through the thick
files he darts his searching eyes,And finds Machaon, where sublime he
stands[132]In arms incircled with his native bands.Then thus: “Machaon, to the
king repair,His wounded brother claims thy timely care;Pierced by some Lycian or
Dardanian bow,A grief to us, a triumph to the foe.”The heavy tidings grieved the
godlike man:Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran.The dauntless king yet
standing firm he found,And all the chiefs in deep concern around.Where to the
steely point the reed was join’d,The shaft he drew, but left the head
behind.Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced,He loosed; the corslet
from his breast unbraced;Then suck’d the blood, and sovereign balm
infused,[133]Which Chiron gave, and Æsculapius used.While round the prince the
Greeks employ their care,The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war;Once more they
glitter in refulgent arms,Once more the fields are fill’d with dire alarms.Nor
had you seen the king of men appearConfused, unactive, or surprised with
fear;But fond of glory, with severe delight,His beating bosom claim’d the rising
fight.No longer with his warlike steeds he stay’d,Or press’d the car with
polish’d brass inlaidBut left Eurymedon the reins to guide;The fiery coursers
snorted at his side.On foot through all the martial ranks he movesAnd these
encourages, and those reproves.“Brave men!” he cries, (to such who boldly
dareUrge their swift steeds to face the coming war),“Your ancient valour on the
foes approve;Jove is with Greece, and let us trust in Jove.’Tis not for us, but
guilty Troy, to dread,Whose crimes sit heavy on her perjured head;Her sons and
matrons Greece shall lead in chains,And her dead warriors strew the mournful
plains.”Thus with new ardour he the brave inspires;Or thus the fearful with
reproaches fires:“Shame to your country, scandal of your kind;Born to the fate
ye well deserve to find!Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful plain,Prepared
for flight, but doom’d to fly in vain?Confused and panting thus, the hunted
deerFalls as he flies, a victim to his fear.Still must ye wait the foes, and
still retire,Till yon tall vessels blaze with Trojan fire?Or trust ye, Jove a
valiant foe shall chase,To save a trembling, heartless, dastard race?”This said,
he stalk’d with ample strides along,To Crete’s brave monarch and his martial
throng;High at their head he saw the chief appear,And bold Meriones excite the
rear.At this the king his generous joy express’d,And clasp’d the warrior to his
armed breast.“Divine Idomeneus! what thanks we oweTo worth like thine! what
praise shall we bestow?To thee the foremost honours are decreed,First in the
fight and every graceful deed.For this, in banquets, when the generous
bowlsRestore our blood, and raise the warriors’ souls,Though all the rest with
stated rules we bound,Unmix’d, unmeasured, are thy goblets crown’d.Be still
thyself, in arms a mighty name;Maintain thy honours, and enlarge thy fame.”To
whom the Cretan thus his speech address’d:“Secure of me, O king! exhort the
rest.Fix’d to thy side, in every toil I share,Thy firm associate in the day of
war.But let the signal be this moment given;To mix in fight is all I ask of
Heaven.The field shall prove how perjuries succeed,And chains or death avenge
the impious deed.”Charm’d with this heat, the king his course pursues,And next
the troops of either Ajax views:In one firm orb the bands were ranged around,A
cloud of heroes blacken’d all the ground.Thus from the lofty promontory’s browA
swain surveys the gathering storm below;Slow from the main the heavy vapours
rise,Spread in dim streams, and sail along the skies,Till black as night the
swelling tempest shows,The cloud condensing as the west-wind blows:He dreads the
impending storm, and drives his flockTo the close covert of an arching
rock.Such, and so thick, the embattled squadrons stood,With spears erect, a
moving iron wood:A shady light was shot from glimmering shields,And their brown
arms obscured the dusky fields.“O heroes! worthy such a dauntless train,Whose
godlike virtue we but urge in vain,(Exclaim’d the king), who raise your eager
bandsWith great examples, more than loud commands.Ah! would the gods but breathe
in all the restSuch souls as burn in your exalted breast,Soon should our arms
with just success be crown’d,And Troy’s proud walls lie smoking on the
ground.”Then to the next the general bends his course;(His heart exults, and
glories in his force);There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian bands,And with
inspiring eloquence commands;With strictest order sets his train in arms,The
chiefs advises, and the soldiers warms.Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, round him
wait,Bias the good, and Pelagon the great.The horse and chariots to the front
assign’d,The foot (the strength of war) he ranged behind;The middle space
suspected troops supply,Inclosed by both, nor left the power to fly;He gives
command to “curb the fiery steed,Nor cause confusion, nor the ranks
exceed:Before the rest let none too rashly ride;No strength nor skill, but just
in time, be tried:The charge once made, no warrior turn the rein,But fight, or
fall; a firm embodied train.He whom the fortune of the field shall castFrom
forth his chariot, mount the next in haste;Nor seek unpractised to direct the
car,Content with javelins to provoke the war.Our great forefathers held this
prudent course,Thus ruled their ardour, thus preserved their force;By laws like
these immortal conquests made,And earth’s proud tyrants low in ashes laid.”So
spoke the master of the martial art,And touch’d with transport great Atrides’
heart.“Oh! hadst thou strength to match thy brave desires,And nerves to second
what thy soul inspires!But wasting years, that wither human race,Exhaust thy
spirits, and thy arms unbrace.What once thou wert, oh ever mightst thou be!And
age the lot of any chief but thee.”Thus to the experienced prince Atrides
cried;He shook his hoary locks, and thus replied:“Well might I wish, could
mortal wish renew[134]That strength which once in boiling youth I knew;Such as I
was, when Ereuthalion, slainBeneath this arm, fell prostrate on the plain.But
heaven its gifts not all at once bestows,These years with wisdom crowns, with
action those:The field of combat fits the young and bold,The solemn council best
becomes the old:To you the glorious conflict I resign,Let sage advice, the palm
of age, be mine.”He said. With joy the monarch march’d before,And found
Menestheus on the dusty shore,With whom the firm Athenian phalanx stands;And
next Ulysses, with his subject bands.Remote their forces lay, nor knew so farThe
peace infringed, nor heard the sounds of war;The tumult late begun, they stood
intentTo watch the motion, dubious of the event.The king, who saw their
squadrons yet unmoved,With hasty ardour thus the chiefs reproved:“Can Peleus’
son forget a warrior’s part.And fears Ulysses, skill’d in every art?Why stand
you distant, and the rest expectTo mix in combat which yourselves neglect?From
you ’twas hoped among the first to dareThe shock of armies, and commence the
war;For this your names are call’d before the rest,To share the pleasures of the
genial feast:And can you, chiefs! without a blush surveyWhole troops before you
labouring in the fray?Say, is it thus those honours you requite?The first in
banquets, but the last in fight.”Ulysses heard: the hero’s warmth o’erspreadHis
cheek with blushes: and severe, he said:“Take back the unjust reproach! Behold
we standSheathed in bright arms, and but expect command.If glorious deeds afford
thy soul delight,Behold me plunging in the thickest fight.Then give thy
warrior-chief a warrior’s due,Who dares to act whate’er thou dar’st to
view.”Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies:“O great in action, and
in council wise!With ours, thy care and ardour are the same,Nor need I to
commend, nor aught to blame.Sage as thou art, and learn’d in human kind,Forgive
the transport of a martial mind.Haste to the fight, secure of just amends;The
gods that make, shall keep the worthy, friends.”He said, and pass’d where great
Tydides lay,His steeds and chariots wedged in firm array;(The warlike Sthenelus
attends his side;)[135]To whom with stern reproach the monarch cried:“O son of
Tydeus! (he, whose strength could tameThe bounding steed, in arms a mighty
name)Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry,With hands unactive, and a
careless eye?Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter fear’d;Still first in front
the matchless prince appear’d:What glorious toils, what wonders they recite,Who
view’d him labouring through the ranks of fight?I saw him once, when gathering
martial powers,A peaceful guest, he sought Mycenæ’s towers;Armies he ask’d, and
armies had been given,Not we denied, but Jove forbade from heaven;While dreadful
comets glaring from afar,Forewarn’d the horrors of the Theban war.[136]Next,
sent by Greece from where Asopus flows,A fearless envoy, he approach’d the
foes;Thebes’ hostile walls unguarded and alone,Dauntless he enters, and demands
the throne.The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found,And dared to combat all
those chiefs around:Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord;For Pallas
strung his arm and edged his sword.Stung with the shame, within the winding
way,To bar his passage fifty warriors lay;Two heroes led the secret squadron
on,Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon;Those fifty slaughter’d in the gloomy
vale.He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale,Such Tydeus was, and such his
martial fire;Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!”No words the godlike
Diomed return’d,But heard respectful, and in secret burn’d:Not so fierce
Capaneus’ undaunted son;Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun:“What needs, O
monarch! this invidious praise,Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you
raise?Dare to be just, Atrides! and confessOur value equal, though our fury
less.With fewer troops we storm’d the Theban wall,And happier saw the sevenfold
city fall,[137]In impious acts the guilty father died;The sons subdued, for
Heaven was on their side.Far more than heirs of all our parents’ fame,Our
glories darken their diminish’d name.”To him Tydides thus: “My friend,
forbear;Suppress thy passion, and the king revere:His high concern may well
excuse this rage,Whose cause we follow, and whose war we wage:His the first
praise, were Ilion’s towers o’erthrown,And, if we fail, the chief disgrace his
own.Let him the Greeks to hardy toils excite,’Tis ours to labour in the glorious
fight.”He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling groundSprung from his car: his
ringing arms resound.Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar,Of arm’d Tydides
rushing to the war.As when the winds, ascending by degrees,[138]First move the
whitening surface of the seas,The billows float in order to the shore,The wave
behind rolls on the wave before;Till, with the growing storm, the deeps
arise,Foam o’er the rocks, and thunder to the skies.So to the fight the thick
battalions throng,Shields urged on shields, and men drove men alongSedate and
silent move the numerous bands;No sound, no whisper, but the chief’s
commands,Those only heard; with awe the rest obey,As if some god had snatch’d
their voice away.Not so the Trojans; from their host ascendsA general shout that
all the region rends.As when the fleecy flocks unnumber’d standIn wealthy folds,
and wait the milker’s hand,The hollow vales incessant bleating fills,The lambs
reply from all the neighbouring hills:Such clamours rose from various nations
round,Mix’d was the murmur, and confused the sound.Each host now joins, and each
a god inspires,These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires,Pale flight around,
and dreadful terror reign;And discord raging bathes the purple plain;Discord!
dire sister of the slaughtering power,Small at her birth, but rising every
hour,While scarce the skies her horrid head can bound,She stalks on earth, and
shakes the world around;[139]The nations bleed, where’er her steps she turns,The
groan still deepens, and the combat burns.Now shield with shield, with helmet
helmet closed,To armour armour, lance to lance opposed,Host against host with
shadowy squadrons drew,The sounding darts in iron tempests flew,Victors and
vanquish’d join’d promiscuous cries,And shrilling shouts and dying groans
arise;With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,And slaughter’d heroes
swell the dreadful tide.As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills,With rage
impetuous, down their echoing hillsRush to the vales, and pour’d along the
plain,Roar through a thousand channels to the main:The distant shepherd
trembling hears the sound;So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound.The bold
Antilochus the slaughter led,The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead:At great
Echepolus the lance arrives,Razed his high crest, and through his helmet
drives;Warm’d in the brain the brazen weapon lies,And shades eternal settle o’er
his eyes.So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stoodOf force and fire, its
walls besmear’d with blood.Him, the bold leader of the Abantian
throng,[140]Seized to despoil, and dragg’d the corpse along:But while he strove
to tug the inserted dart,Agenor’s javelin reach’d the hero’s heart.His flank,
unguarded by his ample shield,Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the
field;The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more;The soul comes floating in
a tide of gore.Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain;The war renews, the
warriors bleed again:As o’er their prey rapacious wolves engage,Man dies on man,
and all is blood and rage.In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell,Sent by great
Ajax to the shades of hell;Fair Simoisius, whom his mother boreAmid the flocks
on silver Simois’ shore:The nymph descending from the hills of Ide,To seek her
parents on his flowery side,Brought forth the babe, their common care and
joy,And thence from Simois named the lovely boy.Short was his date! by dreadful
Ajax slain,He falls, and renders all their cares in vain!So falls a poplar, that
in watery groundRaised high the head, with stately branches crown’d,(Fell’d by
some artist with his shining steel,To shape the circle of the bending wheel,)Cut
down it lies, tall, smooth, and largely spread,With all its beauteous honours on
its headThere, left a subject to the wind and rain,And scorch’d by suns, it
withers on the plainThus pierced by Ajax, Simoisius liesStretch’d on the shore,
and thus neglected dies.At Ajax, Antiphus his javelin threw;The pointed lance
with erring fury flew,And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew.He drops the
corpse of Simoisius slain,And sinks a breathless carcase on the plain.This saw
Ulysses, and with grief enraged,Strode where the foremost of the foes
engaged;Arm’d with his spear, he meditates the wound,In act to throw; but
cautious look’d around,Struck at his sight the Trojans backward drew,And
trembling heard the javelin as it flew.A chief stood nigh, who from Abydos
came,Old Priam’s son, Democoon was his name.The weapon entered close above his
ear,Cold through his temples glides the whizzing spear;[141]With piercing
shrieks the youth resigns his breath,His eye-balls darken with the shades of
death;Ponderous he falls; his clanging arms resound,And his broad buckler rings
against the ground.Seized with affright the boldest foes appear;E’en godlike
Hector seems himself to fear;Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled;The
Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead:But Phœbus now from Ilion’s
towering heightShines forth reveal’d, and animates the fight.“Trojans, be bold,
and force with force oppose;Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!Nor
are their bodies rocks, nor ribb’d with steel;Your weapons enter, and your
strokes they feel.Have ye forgot what seem’d your dread before?The great, the
fierce Achilles fights no more.”Apollo thus from Ilion’s lofty towers,Array’d in
terrors, roused the Trojan powers:While war’s fierce goddess fires the Grecian
foe,And shouts and thunders in the fields below.Then great Diores fell, by doom
divine,In vain his valour and illustrious line.A broken rock the force of Pyrus
threw,(Who from cold Ænus led the Thracian crew,)[142]Full on his ankle dropp’d
the ponderous stone,Burst the strong nerves, and crash’d the solid bone.Supine
he tumbles on the crimson sands,Before his helpless friends, and native
bands,And spreads for aid his unavailing hands.The foe rush’d furious as he
pants for breath,And through his navel drove the pointed death:His gushing
entrails smoked upon the ground,And the warm life came issuing from the
wound.His lance bold Thoas at the conqueror sent,Deep in his breast above the
pap it went,Amid the lungs was fix’d the winged wood,And quivering in his
heaving bosom stood:Till from the dying chief, approaching near,The Ætolian
warrior tugg’d his weighty spear:Then sudden waved his flaming falchion
round,And gash’d his belly with a ghastly wound;The corpse now breathless on the
bloody plain,To spoil his arms the victor strove in vain;The Thracian bands
against the victor press’d,A grove of lances glitter’d at his breast.Stern
Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes,In sullen fury slowly quits the prize.Thus
fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace,And one the leader of the Epeian
race;Death’s sable shade at once o’ercast their eyes,In dust the vanquish’d and
the victor lies.With copious slaughter all the fields are red,And heap’d with
growing mountains of the dead.Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld,By
Pallas guarded through the dreadful field;Might darts be bid to turn their
points away,And swords around him innocently play;The war’s whole art with
wonder had he seen,And counted heroes where he counted men.So fought each host,
with thirst of glory fired,And crowds on crowds triumphantly
expired.[Illustration: ] Map of the Plain of TroyBOOK V.ARGUMENT.THE ACTS OF
DIOMED.Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this day’s
battle.Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enableshim
to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contendingwith any of the
former, excepting Venus. Æneas joins Pandarus to opposehim; Pandarus is killed,
and Æneas in great danger but for theassistance of Venus; who, as she is
removing her son from the fight, iswounded on the hand by Diomed. Apollo seconds
her in his rescue, and atlength carries off Æneas to Troy, where he is healed in
the temple ofPergamus. Mars rallies the Trojans, and assists Hector to make a
stand.In the meantime Æneas is restored to the field, and they overthrowseveral
of the Greeks; among the rest Tlepolemus is slain by Sarpedon.Juno and Minerva
descend to resist Mars; the latter incites Diomed togo against that god; he
wounds him, and sends him groaning to heaven. The first battle continues through
this book. The scene is the same as in the former.But Pallas now Tydides’ soul
inspires,[143]Fills with her force, and warms with all her fires,Above the
Greeks his deathless fame to raise,And crown her hero with distinguish’d
praise.High on his helm celestial lightnings play,His beamy shield emits a
living ray;The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies,Like the red star that
fires the autumnal skies,When fresh he rears his radiant orb to sight,And,
bathed in ocean, shoots a keener light.Such glories Pallas on the chief
bestow’d,Such, from his arms, the fierce effulgence flow’d:Onward she drives
him, furious to engage,Where the fight burns, and where the thickest rage.The
sons of Dares first the combat sought,A wealthy priest, but rich without a
fault;In Vulcan’s fane the father’s days were led,The sons to toils of glorious
battle bred;These singled from their troops the fight maintain,These, from their
steeds, Tydides on the plain.Fierce for renown the brother-chiefs draw near,And
first bold Phegeus cast his sounding spear,Which o’er the warrior’s shoulder
took its course,And spent in empty air its erring force.Not so, Tydides, flew
thy lance in vain,But pierced his breast, and stretch’d him on the plain.Seized
with unusual fear, Idæus fled,Left the rich chariot, and his brother dead.And
had not Vulcan lent celestial aid,He too had sunk to death’s eternal shade;But
in a smoky cloud the god of firePreserved the son, in pity to the sire.The
steeds and chariot, to the navy led,Increased the spoils of gallant
Diomed.Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew,Or slain, or fled, the sons
of Dares view;When by the blood-stain’d hand Minerva press’dThe god of battles,
and this speech address’d:“Stern power of war! by whom the mighty fall,Who bathe
in blood, and shake the lofty wall!Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils
divide;And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:While we from interdicted
fields retire,Nor tempt the wrath of heaven’s avenging sire.”Her words allay the
impetuous warrior’s heat,The god of arms and martial maid retreat;Removed from
fight, on Xanthus’ flowery boundsThey sat, and listen’d to the dying
sounds.Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue,And some bold chieftain every
leader slew:First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand,His death ennobled by
Atrides’ hand:As he to flight his wheeling car address’d,The speedy javelin
drove from back to breast.In dust the mighty Halizonian lay,His arms resound,
the spirit wings its way.Thy fate was next, O Phæstus! doom’d to feelThe great
Idomeneus’ protended steel;Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy)From fruitful
Tarne to the fields of Troy.The Cretan javelin reach’d him from afar,And pierced
his shoulder as he mounts his car;Back from the car he tumbles to the ground,And
everlasting shades his eyes surround.Then died Scamandrius, expert in the
chase,In woods and wilds to wound the savage race;Diana taught him all her
sylvan arts,To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts:But vainly here Diana’s arts
he tries,The fatal lance arrests him as he flies;From Menelaus’ arm the weapon
sent,Through his broad back and heaving bosom went:Down sinks the warrior with a
thundering sound,His brazen armour rings against the ground.Next artful
Phereclus untimely fell;Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.Thy father’s
skill, O Phereclus! was thine,The graceful fabric and the fair design;For loved
by Pallas, Pallas did impartTo him the shipwright’s and the builder’s
art.Beneath his hand the fleet of Paris rose,The fatal cause of all his
country’s woes;But he, the mystic will of heaven unknown,Nor saw his country’s
peril, nor his own.The hapless artist, while confused he fled,The spear of
Merion mingled with the dead.Through his right hip, with forceful fury
cast,Between the bladder and the bone it pass’d;Prone on his knees he falls with
fruitless cries,And death in lasting slumber seals his eyes.From Meges’ force
the swift Pedaeus fled,Antenor’s offspring from a foreign bed,Whose generous
spouse, Theanor, heavenly fair,Nursed the young stranger with a mother’s
care.How vain those cares! when Meges in the rearFull in his nape infix’d the
fatal spear;Swift through his crackling jaws the weapon glides,And the cold
tongue and grinning teeth divides.Then died Hypsenor, generous and divine,Sprung
from the brave Dolopion’s mighty line,Who near adored Scamander made
abode,Priest of the stream, and honoured as a god.On him, amidst the flying
numbers found,Eurypylus inflicts a deadly wound;On his broad shoulders fell the
forceful brand,Thence glancing downwards, lopp’d his holy hand,Which stain’d
with sacred blood the blushing sand.Down sunk the priest: the purple hand of
deathClosed his dim eye, and fate suppress’d his breath.Thus toil’d the chiefs,
in different parts engaged.In every quarter fierce Tydides raged;Amid the Greek,
amid the Trojan train,Rapt through the ranks he thunders o’er the plain;Now
here, now there, he darts from place to place,Pours on the rear, or lightens in
their face.Thus from high hills the torrents swift and strongDeluge whole
fields, and sweep the trees along,Through ruin’d moles the rushing wave
resounds,O’erwhelm’s the bridge, and bursts the lofty bounds;The yellow harvests
of the ripen’d year,And flatted vineyards, one sad waste appear![144]While Jove
descends in sluicy sheets of rain,And all the labours of mankind are vain.So
raged Tydides, boundless in his ire,Drove armies back, and made all Troy
retire.With grief the leader of the Lycian bandSaw the wide waste of his
destructive hand:His bended bow against the chief he drew;Swift to the mark the
thirsty arrow flew,Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore,Deep in his
shoulder pierced, and drank the gore:The rushing stream his brazen armour
dyed,While the proud archer thus exulting cried:“Hither, ye Trojans, hither
drive your steeds!Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds,Not long the
deathful dart he can sustain;Or Phœbus urged me to these fields in vain.”So
spoke he, boastful: but the winged dartStopp’d short of life, and mock’d the
shooter’s art.The wounded chief, behind his car retired,The helping hand of
Sthenelus required;Swift from his seat he leap’d upon the ground,And tugg’d the
weapon from the gushing wound;When thus the king his guardian power
address’d,The purple current wandering o’er his vest:“O progeny of Jove!
unconquer’d maid!If e’er my godlike sire deserved thy aid,If e’er I felt thee in
the fighting field;Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield.O give my lance
to reach the Trojan knight,Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guard’st in
fight;And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore,That vaunts these eyes shall
view the light no more.”Thus pray’d Tydides, and Minerva heard,His nerves
confirm’d, his languid spirits cheer’d;He feels each limb with wonted vigour
light;His beating bosom claim’d the promised fight.“Be bold, (she cried), in
every combat shine,War be thy province, thy protection mine;Rush to the fight,
and every foe control;Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul:Strength swells thy
boiling breast, infused by me,And all thy godlike father breathes in thee;Yet
more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,[145]And set to view the warring
deities.These see thou shun, through all the embattled plain;Nor rashly strive
where human force is vain.If Venus mingle in the martial band,Her shalt thou
wound: so Pallas gives command.”With that, the blue-eyed virgin wing’d her
flight;The hero rush’d impetuous to the fight;With tenfold ardour now invades
the plain,Wild with delay, and more enraged by pain.As on the fleecy flocks when
hunger calls,Amidst the field a brindled lion falls;If chance some shepherd with
a distant dartThe savage wound, he rouses at the smart,He foams, he roars; the
shepherd dares not stay,But trembling leaves the scattering flocks a prey;Heaps
fall on heaps; he bathes with blood the ground,Then leaps victorious o’er the
lofty mound.Not with less fury stern Tydides flew;And two brave leaders at an
instant slew;Astynous breathless fell, and by his side,His people’s pastor, good
Hypenor, died;Astynous’ breast the deadly lance receives,Hypenor’s shoulder his
broad falchion cleaves.Those slain he left, and sprung with noble rageAbas and
Polyidus to engage;Sons of Eurydamus, who, wise and old,Could fate foresee, and
mystic dreams unfold;The youths return’d not from the doubtful plain,And the sad
father tried his arts in vain;No mystic dream could make their fates
appear,Though now determined by Tydides’ spear.Young Xanthus next, and Thoon
felt his rage;The joy and hope of Phaenops’ feeble age:Vast was his wealth, and
these the only heirsOf all his labours and a life of cares.Cold death o’ertakes
them in their blooming years,And leaves the father unavailing tears:To strangers
now descends his heapy store,The race forgotten, and the name no more.Two sons
of Priam in one chariot ride,Glittering in arms, and combat side by side.As when
the lordly lion seeks his foodWhere grazing heifers range the lonely wood,He
leaps amidst them with a furious bound,Bends their strong necks, and tears them
to the ground:So from their seats the brother chiefs are torn,Their steeds and
chariot to the navy borne.With deep concern divine Æneas view’dThe foe
prevailing, and his friends pursued;Through the thick storm of singing spears he
flies,Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.At length he found Lycaon’s mighty
son;To whom the chief of Venus’ race begun:“Where, Pandarus, are all thy honours
now,Thy winged arrows and unerring bow,Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivall’d
fame,And boasted glory of the Lycian name?O pierce that mortal! if we mortal
callThat wondrous force by which whole armies fall;Or god incensed, who quits
the distant skiesTo punish Troy for slighted sacrifice;(Which, oh avert from our
unhappy state!For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?Whoe’er he be, propitiate
Jove with prayer;If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare.”To him the Lycian:
“Whom your eyes behold,If right I judge, is Diomed the bold:Such coursers whirl
him o’er the dusty field,So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.If ’tis
a god, he wears that chief’s disguise:Or if that chief, some guardian of the
skies,Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray,And turns unseen the
frustrate dart away.I wing’d an arrow, which not idly fell,The stroke had fix’d
him to the gates of hell;And, but some god, some angry god withstands,His fate
was due to these unerring hands.Skill’d in the bow, on foot I sought the war,Nor
join’d swift horses to the rapid car.Ten polish’d chariots I possess’d at
home,And still they grace Lycaon’s princely dome:There veil’d in spacious
coverlets they stand;And twice ten coursers wait their lord’s command.The good
old warrior bade me trust to these,When first for Troy I sail’d the sacred
seas;In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide,And through the ranks of death
triumphant ride.But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined,I heard his
counsels with unheedful mind,And thought the steeds (your large supplies
unknown)Might fail of forage in the straiten’d town;So took my bow and pointed
darts in handAnd left the chariots in my native land.“Too late, O friend! my
rashness I deplore;These shafts, once fatal, carry death no more.Tydeus’ and
Atreus’ sons their points have found,And undissembled gore pursued the wound.In
vain they bleed: this unavailing bowServes, not to slaughter, but provoke the
foe.In evil hour these bended horns I strung,And seized the quiver where it idly
hung.Cursed be the fate that sent me to the fieldWithout a warrior’s arms, the
spear and shield!If e’er with life I quit the Trojan plain,If e’er I see my
spouse and sire again,This bow, unfaithful to my glorious aims,Broke by my hand,
shall feed the blazing flames.”To whom the leader of the Dardan race:“Be calm,
nor Phœbus’ honour’d gift disgrace.The distant dart be praised, though here we
needThe rushing chariot and the bounding steed.Against yon hero let us bend our
course,And, hand to hand, encounter force with force.Now mount my seat, and from
the chariot’s heightObserve my father’s steeds, renown’d in fight;Practised
alike to turn, to stop, to chase,To dare the shock, or urge the rapid
race;Secure with these, through fighting fields we go;Or safe to Troy, if Jove
assist the foe.Haste, seize the whip, and snatch the guiding rein;The warrior’s
fury let this arm sustain;Or, if to combat thy bold heart incline,Take thou the
spear, the chariot’s care be mine.”“O prince! (Lycaon’s valiant son replied)As
thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide.The horses, practised to their
lord’s command,Shall bear the rein, and answer to thy hand;But, if, unhappy, we
desert the fight,Thy voice alone can animate their flight;Else shall our fates
be number’d with the dead,And these, the victor’s prize, in triumph led.Thine be
the guidance, then: with spear and shieldMyself will charge this terror of the
field.”And now both heroes mount the glittering car;The bounding coursers rush
amidst the war;Their fierce approach bold Sthenelus espied,Who thus, alarm’d, to
great Tydides cried:“O friend! two chiefs of force immense I see,Dreadful they
come, and bend their rage on thee:Lo the brave heir of old Lycaon’s line,And
great Æneas, sprung from race divine!Enough is given to fame. Ascend thy car!And
save a life, the bulwark of our war.”At this the hero cast a gloomy look,Fix’d
on the chief with scorn; and thus he spoke:“Me dost thou bid to shun the coming
fight?Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight?Know, ’tis not honest in
my soul to fear,Nor was Tydides born to tremble here.I hate the cumbrous
chariot’s slow advance,And the long distance of the flying lance;But while my
nerves are strong, my force entire,Thus front the foe, and emulate my sire.Nor
shall yon steeds, that fierce to fight conveyThose threatening heroes, bear them
both away;One chief at least beneath this arm shall die;So Pallas tells me, and
forbids to fly.But if she dooms, and if no god withstand,That both shall fall by
one victorious hand,Then heed my words: my horses here detain,Fix’d to the
chariot by the straiten’d rein;Swift to Æneas’ empty seat proceed,And seize the
coursers of ethereal breed;The race of those, which once the thundering
god[146]For ravish’d Ganymede on Tros bestow’d,The best that e’er on earth’s
broad surface run,Beneath the rising or the setting sun.Hence great Anchises
stole a breed unknown,By mortal mares, from fierce Laomedon:Four of this race
his ample stalls contain,And two transport Æneas o’er the plain.These, were the
rich immortal prize our own,Through the wide world should make our glory
known.”Thus while they spoke, the foe came furious on,And stern Lycaon’s warlike
race begun:“Prince, thou art met. Though late in vain assail’d,The spear may
enter where the arrow fail’d.”He said, then shook the ponderous lance, and
flung;On his broad shield the sounding weapon rung,Pierced the tough orb, and in
his cuirass hung,“He bleeds! the pride of Greece! (the boaster cries,)Our
triumph now, the mighty warrior lies!”“Mistaken vaunter! (Diomed replied;)Thy
dart has erred, and now my spear be tried;Ye ’scape not both; one, headlong from
his car,With hostile blood shall glut the god of war.”He spoke, and rising
hurl’d his forceful dart,Which, driven by Pallas, pierced a vital part;Full in
his face it enter’d, and betwixtThe nose and eye-ball the proud Lycian
fix’d;Crash’d all his jaws, and cleft the tongue within,Till the bright point
look’d out beneath the chin.Headlong he falls, his helmet knocks the
ground:Earth groans beneath him, and his arms resound;The starting coursers
tremble with affright;The soul indignant seeks the realms of night.To guard his
slaughter’d friend, Æneas flies,His spear extending where the carcase
lies;Watchful he wheels, protects it every way,As the grim lion stalks around
his prey.O’er the fall’n trunk his ample shield display’d,He hides the hero with
his mighty shade,And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyesBehold at
distance, but forbear the prize.Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the
fieldsHeaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.Not two strong men the
enormous weight could raise,Such men as live in these degenerate days:[147]He
swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw,Discharged the ponderous ruin
at the foe.Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites,Full on the bone the
pointed marble lights;Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone,And
stripp’d the skin, and crack’d the solid bone.Sunk on his knees, and staggering
with his pains,His falling bulk his bended arm sustains;Lost in a dizzy mist the
warrior lies;A sudden cloud comes swimming o’er his eyes.There the brave chief,
who mighty numbers sway’d,Oppress’d had sunk to death’s eternal shade,But
heavenly Venus, mindful of the loveShe bore Anchises in the Idaean grove,His
danger views with anguish and despair,And guards her offspring with a mother’s
care.About her much-loved son her arms she throws,Her arms whose whiteness match
the falling snows.Screen’d from the foe behind her shining veil,The swords wave
harmless, and the javelins fail;Safe through the rushing horse, and feather’d
flightOf sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.Nor Sthenelus, with
unassisting hands,Remain’d unheedful of his lord’s commands:His panting steeds,
removed from out the war,He fix’d with straiten’d traces to the car,Next,
rushing to the Dardan spoil, detainsThe heavenly coursers with the flowing
manes:These in proud triumph to the fleet convey’d,No longer now a Trojan lord
obey’d.That charge to bold Deipylus he gave,(Whom most he loved, as brave men
love the brave,)Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein,And follow’d where
Tydides swept the plain.Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes)The
raging chief in chase of Venus flies:No goddess she, commission’d to the
field,Like Pallas dreadful with her sable shield,Or fierce Bellona thundering at
the wall,While flames ascend, and mighty ruins fall;He knew soft combats suit
the tender dame,New to the field, and still a foe to fame.Through breaking ranks
his furious course he bends,And at the goddess his broad lance extends;Through
her bright veil the daring weapon drove,The ambrosial veil which all the Graces
wove;Her snowy hand the razing steel profaned,And the transparent skin with
crimson stain’d,From the clear vein a stream immortal flow’d,Such stream as
issues from a wounded god;[148]Pure emanation! uncorrupted flood!Unlike our
gross, diseased, terrestrial blood:(For not the bread of man their life
sustains,Nor wine’s inflaming juice supplies their veins:)With tender shrieks
the goddess fill’d the place,And dropp’d her offspring from her weak embrace.Him
Phœbus took: he casts a cloud aroundThe fainting chief, and wards the mortal
wound.Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies,The king insults the
goddess as she flies:“Ill with Jove’s daughter bloody fights agree,The field of
combat is no scene for thee:Go, let thy own soft sex employ thy care,Go, lull
the coward, or delude the fair.Taught by this stroke renounce the war’s
alarms,And learn to tremble at the name of arms.”Tydides thus. The goddess,
seized with dread,Confused, distracted, from the conflict fled.To aid her, swift
the winged Iris flew,Wrapt in a mist above the warring crew.The queen of love
with faded charms she found.Pale was her cheek, and livid look’d the wound.To
Mars, who sat remote, they bent their way:Far, on the left, with clouds involved
he lay;Beside him stood his lance, distain’d with gore,And, rein’d with gold,
his foaming steeds before.Low at his knee, she begg’d with streaming eyesHer
brother’s car, to mount the distant skies,And show’d the wound by fierce Tydides
given,A mortal man, who dares encounter heaven.Stern Mars attentive hears the
queen complain,And to her hand commits the golden rein;She mounts the seat,
oppress’d with silent woe,Driven by the goddess of the painted bow.The lash
resounds, the rapid chariot flies,And in a moment scales the lofty skies:They
stopp’d the car, and there the coursers stood,Fed by fair Iris with ambrosial
food;Before her mother, love’s bright queen appears,O’erwhelmed with anguish,
and dissolved in tears:She raised her in her arms, beheld her bleed,And ask’d
what god had wrought this guilty deed?[Illustration: ] VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE
HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARSThen she: “This insult from no god I found,An
impious mortal gave the daring wound!Behold the deed of haughty Diomed!’Twas in
the son’s defence the mother bled.The war with Troy no more the Grecians
wage;But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage.”Dione then: “Thy wrongs with
patience bear,And share those griefs inferior powers must share:Unnumber’d woes
mankind from us sustain,And men with woes afflict the gods again.The mighty Mars
in mortal fetters bound,[149]And lodged in brazen dungeons underground,Full
thirteen moons imprison’d roar’d in vain;Otus and Ephialtes held the
chain:Perhaps had perish’d had not Hermes’ careRestored the groaning god to
upper air.Great Juno’s self has borne her weight of pain,The imperial partner of
the heavenly reign;Amphitryon’s son infix’d the deadly dart,[150]And fill’d with
anguish her immortal heart.E’en hell’s grim king Alcides’ power confess’d,The
shaft found entrance in his iron breast;To Jove’s high palace for a cure he
fled,Pierced in his own dominions of the dead;Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly
balm around,Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.Rash, impious man!
to stain the bless’d abodes,And drench his arrows in the blood of
gods![Illustration: ] OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE“But thou (though
Pallas urged thy frantic deed),Whose spear ill-fated makes a goddess bleed,Know
thou, whoe’er with heavenly power contends,Short is his date, and soon his glory
ends;From fields of death when late he shall retire,No infant on his knees shall
call him sire.Strong as thou art, some god may yet be found,To stretch thee pale
and gasping on the ground;Thy distant wife, Ægialé the fair,[151]Starting from
sleep with a distracted air,Shall rouse thy slaves, and her lost lord
deplore,The brave, the great, the glorious now no more!”This said, she wiped
from Venus’ wounded palmThe sacred ichor, and infused the balm.Juno and Pallas
with a smile survey’d,And thus to Jove began the blue-eyed maid:“Permit thy
daughter, gracious Jove! to tellHow this mischance the Cyprian queen befell,As
late she tried with passion to inflameThe tender bosom of a Grecian dame;Allured
the fair, with moving thoughts of joy,To quit her country for some youth of
Troy;The clasping zone, with golden buckles bound,Razed her soft hand with this
lamented wound.”The sire of gods and men superior smiled,And, calling Venus,
thus address’d his child:“Not these, O daughter are thy proper cares,Thee milder
arts befit, and softer wars;Sweet smiles are thine, and kind endearing charms;To
Mars and Pallas leave the deeds of arms.”Thus they in heaven: while on the plain
belowThe fierce Tydides charged his Dardan foe,Flush’d with celestial blood
pursued his way,And fearless dared the threatening god of day;Already in his
hopes he saw him kill’d,Though screen’d behind Apollo’s mighty shield.Thrice
rushing furious, at the chief he strook;His blazing buckler thrice Apollo
shook:He tried the fourth: when, breaking from the cloud,A more than mortal
voice was heard aloud.“O son of Tydeus, cease! be wise and seeHow vast the
difference of the gods and thee;Distance immense! between the powers that
shineAbove, eternal, deathless, and divine,And mortal man! a wretch of humble
birth,A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth.”So spoke the god who darts
celestial fires:He dreads his fury, and some steps retires.Then Phœbus bore the
chief of Venus’ raceTo Troy’s high fane, and to his holy place;Latona there and
Phoebe heal’d the wound,With vigour arm’d him, and with glory crown’d.This done,
the patron of the silver bowA phantom raised, the same in shape and showWith
great Æneas; such the form he bore,And such in fight the radiant arms he
wore.Around the spectre bloody wars are waged,And Greece and Troy with clashing
shields engaged.Meantime on Ilion’s tower Apollo stood,And calling Mars, thus
urged the raging god:“Stern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall;Who bathest
in blood, and shakest the embattled wall,Rise in thy wrath! to hell’s abhorr’d
abodesDespatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods.First rosy Venus felt his
brutal rage;Me next he charged, and dares all heaven engage:The wretch would
brave high heaven’s immortal sire,His triple thunder, and his bolts of fire.”The
god of battle issues on the plain,Stirs all the ranks, and fires the Trojan
train;In form like Acamas, the Thracian guide,Enraged to Troy’s retiring chiefs
he cried:“How long, ye sons of Priam! will ye fly,And unrevenged see Priam’s
people die?Still unresisted shall the foe destroy,And stretch the slaughter to
the gates of Troy?Lo, brave Æneas sinks beneath his wound,Not godlike Hector
more in arms renown’d:Haste all, and take the generous warrior’s part.He
said;—new courage swell’d each hero’s heart.Sarpedon first his ardent soul
express’d,And, turn’d to Hector, these bold words address’d:“Say, chief, is all
thy ancient valour lost?Where are thy threats, and where thy glorious boast,That
propp’d alone by Priam’s race should standTroy’s sacred walls, nor need a
foreign hand?Now, now thy country calls her wonted friends,And the proud vaunt
in just derision ends.Remote they stand while alien troops engage,Like trembling
hounds before the lion’s rage.Far distant hence I held my wide command,Where
foaming Xanthus laves the Lycian land;With ample wealth (the wish of mortals)
bless’d,A beauteous wife, and infant at her breast;With those I left whatever
dear could be:Greece, if she conquers, nothing wins from me;Yet first in fight
my Lycian bands I cheer,And long to meet this mighty man ye fear;While Hector
idle stands, nor bids the braveTheir wives, their infants, and their altars
save.Haste, warrior, haste! preserve thy threaten’d state,Or one vast burst of
all-involving fateFull o’er your towers shall fall, and sweep awaySons, sires,
and wives, an undistinguish’d prey.Rouse all thy Trojans, urge thy aids to
fight;These claim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by night;With force incessant
the brave Greeks oppose;Such cares thy friends deserve, and such thy foes.”Stung
to the heart the generous Hector hears,But just reproof with decent silence
bears.From his proud car the prince impetuous springs,On earth he leaps, his
brazen armour rings.Two shining spears are brandish’d in his hands;Thus arm’d,
he animates his drooping bands,Revives their ardour, turns their steps from
flight,And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.They turn, they stand; the
Greeks their fury dare,Condense their powers, and wait the growing war.As when,
on Ceres’ sacred floor, the swainSpreads the wide fan to clear the golden
grain,And the light chaff, before the breezes borne,Ascends in clouds from off
the heapy corn;The grey dust, rising with collected winds,Drives o’er the barn,
and whitens all the hinds:So white with dust the Grecian host appears,From
trampling steeds, and thundering charioteers.The dusky clouds from labour’d
earth arise,And roll in smoking volumes to the skies.Mars hovers o’er them with
his sable shield,And adds new horrors to the darken’d field:Pleased with his
charge, and ardent to fulfil,In Troy’s defence, Apollo’s heavenly will:Soon as
from fight the blue-eyed maid retires,Each Trojan bosom with new warmth he
fires.And now the god, from forth his sacred fane,Produced Æneas to the shouting
train;Alive, unharm’d, with all his peers around,Erect he stood, and vigorous
from his wound:Inquiries none they made; the dreadful dayNo pause of words
admits, no dull delay;Fierce Discord storms, Apollo loud exclaims,Fame calls,
Mars thunders, and the field’s in flames.Stern Diomed with either Ajax stood,And
great Ulysses, bathed in hostile blood.Embodied close, the labouring Grecian
trainThe fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain.Unmoved and silent, the whole
war they waitSerenely dreadful, and as fix’d as fate.So when the embattled
clouds in dark array,Along the skies their gloomy lines display;When now the
North his boisterous rage has spent,And peaceful sleeps the liquid element:The
low-hung vapours, motionless and still,Rest on the summits of the shaded
hill;Till the mass scatters as the winds arise,Dispersed and broken through the
ruffled skies.Nor was the general wanting to his train;From troop to troop he
toils through all the plain,“Ye Greeks, be men! the charge of battle bear;Your
brave associates and yourselves revere!Let glorious acts more glorious acts
inspire,And catch from breast to breast the noble fire!On valour’s side the odds
of combat lie,The brave live glorious, or lamented die;The wretch who trembles
in the field of fame,Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame!”These
words he seconds with his flying lance,To meet whose point was strong Deicoon’s
chance:Æneas’ friend, and in his native placeHonour’d and loved like Priam’s
royal race:Long had he fought the foremost in the field,But now the monarch’s
lance transpierced his shield:His shield too weak the furious dart to
stay,Through his broad belt the weapon forced its way:The grisly wound dismiss’d
his soul to hell,His arms around him rattled as he fell.Then fierce Æneas,
brandishing his blade,In dust Orsilochus and Crethon laid,Whose sire Diocleus,
wealthy, brave and great,In well-built Pheræ held his lofty seat:[152]Sprung
from Alpheus’ plenteous stream, that yieldsIncrease of harvests to the Pylian
fields.He got Orsilochus, Diocleus he,And these descended in the third
degree.Too early expert in the martial toil,In sable ships they left their
native soil,To avenge Atrides: now, untimely slain,They fell with glory on the
Phrygian plain.So two young mountain lions, nursed with bloodIn deep recesses of
the gloomy wood,Rush fearless to the plains, and uncontroll’dDepopulate the
stalls and waste the fold:Till pierced at distance from their native
den,O’erpowered they fall beneath the force of men.Prostrate on earth their
beauteous bodies lay,Like mountain firs, as tall and straight as they.Great
Menelaus views with pitying eyes,Lifts his bright lance, and at the victor
flies;Mars urged him on; yet, ruthless in his hate,The god but urged him to
provoke his fate.He thus advancing, Nestor’s valiant sonShakes for his danger,
and neglects his own;Struck with the thought, should Helen’s lord be slain,And
all his country’s glorious labours vain.Already met, the threatening heroes
stand;The spears already tremble in their hand:In rush’d Antilochus, his aid to
bring,And fall or conquer by the Spartan king.These seen, the Dardan backward
turn’d his course,Brave as he was, and shunn’d unequal force.The breathless
bodies to the Greeks they drew,Then mix in combat, and their toils renew.First,
Pylæmenes, great in battle, bled,Who sheathed in brass the Paphlagonians
led.Atrides mark’d him where sublime he stood;Fix’d in his throat the javelin
drank his blood.The faithful Mydon, as he turn’d from fightHis flying coursers,
sunk to endless night;A broken rock by Nestor’s son was thrown:His bended arm
received the falling stone;From his numb’d hand the ivory-studded reins,Dropp’d
in the dust, are trail’d along the plains:Meanwhile his temples feel a deadly
wound;He groans in death, and ponderous sinks to ground:Deep drove his helmet in
the sands, and thereThe head stood fix’d, the quivering legs in air,Till
trampled flat beneath the coursers’ feet:The youthful victor mounts his empty
seat,And bears the prize in triumph to the fleet.Great Hector saw, and, raging
at the view,Pours on the Greeks: the Trojan troops pursue:He fires his host with
animating cries,And brings along the furies of the skies,Mars, stern destroyer!
and Bellona dread,Flame in the front, and thunder at their head:This swells the
tumult and the rage of fight;That shakes a spear that casts a dreadful
light.Where Hector march’d, the god of battles shined,Now storm’d before him,
and now raged behind.Tydides paused amidst his full career;Then first the hero’s
manly breast knew fear.As when some simple swain his cot forsakes,And wide
through fens an unknown journey takes:If chance a swelling brook his passage
stay,And foam impervious ’cross the wanderer’s way,Confused he stops, a length
of country pass’d,Eyes the rough waves, and tired, returns at last.Amazed no
less the great Tydides stands:He stay’d, and turning thus address’d his
bands:“No wonder, Greeks! that all to Hector yield;Secure of favouring gods, he
takes the field;His strokes they second, and avert our spears.Behold where Mars
in mortal arms appears!Retire then, warriors, but sedate and slow;Retire, but
with your faces to the foe.Trust not too much your unavailing might;’Tis not
with Troy, but with the gods ye fight.”Now near the Greeks the black battalions
drew;And first two leaders valiant Hector slew:His force Anchialus and Mnesthes
found,In every art of glorious war renown’d;In the same car the chiefs to combat
ride,And fought united, and united died.Struck at the sight, the mighty Ajax
glowsWith thirst of vengeance, and assaults the foes.His massy spear with
matchless fury sent,Through Amphius’ belt and heaving belly went;Amphius Apæsus’
happy soil possess’d,With herds abounding, and with treasure bless’d;But fate
resistless from his country ledThe chief, to perish at his people’s head.Shook
with his fall his brazen armour rung,And fierce, to seize it, conquering Ajax
sprung;Around his head an iron tempest rain’d;A wood of spears his ample shield
sustain’d:Beneath one foot the yet warm corpse he press’d,And drew his javelin
from the bleeding breast:He could no more; the showering darts deniedTo spoil
his glittering arms, and plumy pride.Now foes on foes came pouring on the
fields,With bristling lances, and compacted shields;Till in the steely circle
straiten’d round,Forced he gives way, and sternly quits the ground.While thus
they strive, Tlepolemus the great,[153]Urged by the force of unresisted
fate,Burns with desire Sarpedon’s strength to prove;Alcides’ offspring meets the
son of Jove.Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on.Jove’s great
descendant, and his greater son.Prepared for combat, ere the lance he toss’d,The
daring Rhodian vents his haughty boast:“What brings this Lycian counsellor so
far,To tremble at our arms, not mix in war!Know thy vain self, nor let their
flattery move,Who style thee son of cloud-compelling Jove.How far unlike those
chiefs of race divine,How vast the difference of their deeds and thine!Jove got
such heroes as my sire, whose soulNo fear could daunt, nor earth nor hell
control.Troy felt his arm, and yon proud ramparts standRaised on the ruins of
his vengeful hand:With six small ships, and but a slender train,He left the town
a wide-deserted plain.But what art thou, who deedless look’st around,While
unrevenged thy Lycians bite the ground!Small aid to Troy thy feeble force can
be;But wert thou greater, thou must yield to me.Pierced by my spear, to endless
darkness go!I make this present to the shades below.”The son of Hercules, the
Rhodian guide,Thus haughty spoke. The Lycian king replied:“Thy sire, O prince!
o’erturn’d the Trojan state,Whose perjured monarch well deserved his fate;Those
heavenly steeds the hero sought so far,False he detain’d, the just reward of
war.Nor so content, the generous chief defied,With base reproaches and unmanly
pride.But you, unworthy the high race you boast,Shall raise my glory when thy
own is lost:Now meet thy fate, and by Sarpedon slain,Add one more ghost to
Pluto’s gloomy reign.”He said: both javelins at an instant flew;Both struck,
both wounded, but Sarpedon’s slew:Full in the boaster’s neck the weapon
stood,Transfix’d his throat, and drank the vital blood;The soul disdainful seeks
the caves of night,And his seal’d eyes for ever lose the light.Yet not in vain,
Tlepolemus, was thrownThy angry lance; which piercing to the boneSarpedon’s
thigh, had robb’d the chief of breath;But Jove was present, and forbade the
death.Borne from the conflict by his Lycian throng,The wounded hero dragg’d the
lance along.(His friends, each busied in his several part,Through haste, or
danger, had not drawn the dart.)The Greeks with slain Tlepolemus retired;Whose
fall Ulysses view’d, with fury fired;Doubtful if Jove’s great son he should
pursue,Or pour his vengeance on the Lycian crew.But heaven and fate the first
design withstand,Nor this great death must grace Ulysses’ hand.Minerva drives
him on the Lycian train;Alastor, Cronius, Halius, strew’d the plain,Alcander,
Prytanis, Noëmon fell:[154]And numbers more his sword had sent to hell,But
Hector saw; and, furious at the sight,Rush’d terrible amidst the ranks of
fight.With joy Sarpedon view’d the wish’d relief,And, faint, lamenting, thus
implored the chief:“O suffer not the foe to bear awayMy helpless corpse, an
unassisted prey;If I, unbless’d, must see my son no more,My much-loved consort,
and my native shore,Yet let me die in Ilion’s sacred wall;Troy, in whose cause I
fell, shall mourn my fall.”He said, nor Hector to the chief replies,But shakes
his plume, and fierce to combat flies;Swift as a whirlwind, drives the
scattering foes;And dyes the ground with purple as he goes.Beneath a beech,
Jove’s consecrated shade,His mournful friends divine Sarpedon laid:Brave
Pelagon, his favourite chief, was nigh,Who wrench’d the javelin from his sinewy
thigh.The fainting soul stood ready wing’d for flight,And o’er his eye-balls
swam the shades of night;But Boreas rising fresh, with gentle breath,Recall’d
his spirit from the gates of death.The generous Greeks recede with tardy
pace,Though Mars and Hector thunder in their face;None turn their backs to mean
ignoble flight,Slow they retreat, and even retreating fight.Who first, who last,
by Mars’ and Hector’s hand,Stretch’d in their blood, lay gasping on the
sand?Tenthras the great, Orestes the renown’dFor managed steeds, and Trechus
press’d the ground;Next Œnomaus and OEnops’ offspring died;Oresbius last fell
groaning at their side:Oresbius, in his painted mitre gay,In fat Bœotia held his
wealthy sway,Where lakes surround low Hylè’s watery plain;A prince and people
studious of their gain.The carnage Juno from the skies survey’d,And touch’d with
grief bespoke the blue-eyed maid:“Oh, sight accursed! Shall faithless Troy
prevail,And shall our promise to our people fail?How vain the word to Menelaus
givenBy Jove’s great daughter and the queen of heaven,Beneath his arms that
Priam’s towers should fall,If warring gods for ever guard the wall!Mars, red
with slaughter, aids our hated foes:Haste, let us arm, and force with force
oppose!”She spoke; Minerva burns to meet the war:And now heaven’s empress calls
her blazing car.At her command rush forth the steeds divine;Rich with immortal
gold their trappings shine.Bright Hebe waits; by Hebe, ever young,The whirling
wheels are to the chariot hung.On the bright axle turns the bidden wheelOf
sounding brass; the polished axle steel.Eight brazen spokes in radiant order
flame;The circles gold, of uncorrupted frame,Such as the heavens produce: and
round the goldTwo brazen rings of work divine were roll’d.The bossy naves of
sold silver shone;Braces of gold suspend the moving throne:The car, behind, an
arching figure bore;The bending concave form’d an arch before.Silver the beam,
the extended yoke was gold,And golden reins the immortal coursers hold.Herself,
impatient, to the ready car,The coursers joins, and breathes revenge and
war.Pallas disrobes; her radiant veil untied,With flowers adorn’d, with art
diversified,(The laboured veil her heavenly fingers wove,)Flows on the pavement
of the court of Jove.Now heaven’s dread arms her mighty limbs invest,Jove’s
cuirass blazes on her ample breast;Deck’d in sad triumph for the mournful
field,O’er her broad shoulders hangs his horrid shield,Dire, black, tremendous!
Round the margin roll’d,A fringe of serpents hissing guards the gold:Here all
the terrors of grim War appear,Here rages Force, here tremble Flight and
Fear,Here storm’d Contention, and here Fury frown’d,And the dire orb portentous
Gorgon crown’d.The massy golden helm she next assumes,That dreadful nods with
four o’ershading plumes;So vast, the broad circumference containsA hundred
armies on a hundred plains.The goddess thus the imperial car ascends;Shook by
her arm the mighty javelin bends,Ponderous and huge; that when her fury
burns,Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o’erturns.Swift at the scourge the
ethereal coursers fly,While the smooth chariot cuts the liquid sky.Heaven’s
gates spontaneous open to the powers,[155]Heaven’s golden gates, kept by the
winged Hours;[156]Commission’d in alternate watch they stand,The sun’s bright
portals and the skies command,Involve in clouds the eternal gates of day,Or the
dark barrier roll with ease away.The sounding hinges ring, on either sideThe
gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide.The chariot mounts, where deep in
ambient skies,Confused, Olympus’ hundred heads arise;Where far apart the
Thunderer fills his throne,O’er all the gods superior and alone.There with her
snowy hand the queen restrainsThe fiery steeds, and thus to Jove complains:“O
sire! can no resentment touch thy soul?Can Mars rebel, and does no thunder
roll?What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain,What rash destruction! and what
heroes slain!Venus, and Phœbus with the dreadful bow,Smile on the slaughter, and
enjoy my woe.Mad, furious power! whose unrelenting mindNo god can govern, and no
justice bind.Say, mighty father! shall we scourge this pride,And drive from
fight the impetuous homicide?”To whom assenting, thus the Thunderer said:“Go!
and the great Minerva be thy aid.To tame the monster-god Minerva knows,And oft
afflicts his brutal breast with woes.”He said; Saturnia, ardent to obey,Lash’d
her white steeds along the aerial way.Swift down the steep of heaven the chariot
rolls,Between the expanded earth and starry poles.Far as a shepherd, from some
point on high,[157]O’er the wide main extends his boundless eye,Through such a
space of air, with thundering sound,At every leap the immortal coursers
boundTroy now they reach’d and touch’d those banks divine,Where silver Simois
and Scamander join.There Juno stopp’d, and (her fair steeds unloosed)Of air
condensed a vapour circumfused:For these, impregnate with celestial dew,On
Simois’ brink ambrosial herbage grew.Thence to relieve the fainting Argive
throng,Smooth as the sailing doves they glide along.The best and bravest of the
Grecian band(A warlike circle) round Tydides stand.Such was their look as lions
bathed in blood,Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.Heaven’s empress
mingles with the mortal crowd,And shouts, in Stentor’s sounding voice,
aloud;Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,[158]Whose throats surpass’d
the force of fifty tongues.“Inglorious Argives! to your race a shame,And only
men in figure and in name!Once from the walls your timorous foes engaged,While
fierce in war divine Achilles raged;Now issuing fearless they possess the
plain,Now win the shores, and scarce the seas remain.”Her speech new fury to
their hearts convey’d;While near Tydides stood the Athenian maid;The king beside
his panting steeds she found,O’erspent with toil reposing on the ground;To cool
his glowing wound he sat apart,(The wound inflicted by the Lycian dart.)Large
drops of sweat from all his limbs descend,Beneath his ponderous shield his
sinews bend,Whose ample belt, that o’er his shoulder lay,He eased; and wash’d
the clotted gore away.The goddess leaning o’er the bending yoke,Beside his
coursers, thus her silence broke:“Degenerate prince! and not of Tydeus’
kind,Whose little body lodged a mighty mind;Foremost he press’d in glorious
toils to share,And scarce refrain’d when I forbade the war.Alone, unguarded,
once he dared to go,And feast, incircled by the Theban foe;There braved, and
vanquish’d, many a hardy knight;Such nerves I gave him, and such force in
fight.Thou too no less hast been my constant care;Thy hands I arm’d, and sent
thee forth to war:But thee or fear deters, or sloth detains;No drop of all thy
father warms thy veins.”The chief thus answered mild: “Immortal maid!I own thy
presence, and confess thy aid.Not fear, thou know’st, withholds me from the
plains,Nor sloth hath seized me, but thy word restrains:From warring gods thou
bad’st me turn my spear,And Venus only found resistance here.Hence, goddess!
heedful of thy high commands,Loth I gave way, and warn’d our Argive bands:For
Mars, the homicide, these eyes beheld,With slaughter red, and raging round the
field.”Then thus Minerva:—“Brave Tydides, hear!Not Mars himself, nor aught
immortal, fear.Full on the god impel thy foaming horse:Pallas commands, and
Pallas lends thee force.Rash, furious, blind, from these to those he flies,And
every side of wavering combat tries;Large promise makes, and breaks the promise
made:Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid.”[159]She said, and to the
steeds approaching near,Drew from his seat the martial charioteer.The vigorous
power the trembling car ascends,Fierce for revenge; and Diomed attends:The
groaning axle bent beneath the load;So great a hero, and so great a god.She
snatch’d the reins, she lash’d with all her force,And full on Mars impelled the
foaming horse:But first, to hide her heavenly visage, spreadBlack Orcus’ helmet
o’er her radiant head.[Illustration: ] DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARSJust then
gigantic Periphas lay slain,The strongest warrior of the Ætolian train;The god,
who slew him, leaves his prostrate prizeStretch’d where he fell, and at Tydides
flies.Now rushing fierce, in equal arms appearThe daring Greek, the dreadful god
of war!Full at the chief, above his courser’s head,From Mars’s arm the enormous
weapon fled:Pallas opposed her hand, and caused to glanceFar from the car the
strong immortal lance.Then threw the force of Tydeus’ warlike son;The javelin
hiss’d; the goddess urged it on:Where the broad cincture girt his armour
round,It pierced the god: his groin received the wound.From the rent skin the
warrior tugs againThe smoking steel. Mars bellows with the pain:Loud as the roar
encountering armies yield,When shouting millions shake the thundering field.Both
armies start, and trembling gaze around;And earth and heaven re-bellow to the
sound.As vapours blown by Auster’s sultry breath,Pregnant with plagues, and
shedding seeds of death,Beneath the rage of burning Sirius rise,Choke the
parch’d earth, and blacken all the skies;In such a cloud the god from combat
driven,High o’er the dusky whirlwind scales the heaven.Wild with his pain, he
sought the bright abodes,There sullen sat beneath the sire of gods,Show’d the
celestial blood, and with a groanThus pour’d his plaints before the immortal
throne:“Can Jove, supine, flagitious facts survey,And brook the furies of this
daring day?For mortal men celestial powers engage,And gods on gods exert eternal
rage:From thee, O father! all these ills we bear,And thy fell daughter with the
shield and spear;Thou gavest that fury to the realms of light,Pernicious, wild,
regardless of the right.All heaven beside reveres thy sovereign sway,Thy voice
we hear, and thy behests obey:’Tis hers to offend, and even offending shareThy
breast, thy counsels, thy distinguish’d care:So boundless she, and thou so
partial grown,Well may we deem the wondrous birth thy own.Now frantic Diomed, at
her command,Against the immortals lifts his raging hand:The heavenly Venus first
his fury found,Me next encountering, me he dared to wound;Vanquish’d I fled;
even I, the god of fight,From mortal madness scarce was saved by flight.Else
hadst thou seen me sink on yonder plain,Heap’d round, and heaving under loads of
slain!Or pierced with Grecian darts, for ages lie,Condemn’d to pain, though
fated not to die.”Him thus upbraiding, with a wrathful lookThe lord of thunders
view’d, and stern bespoke:“To me, perfidious! this lamenting strain?Of lawless
force shall lawless Mars complain?Of all the gods who tread the spangled
skies,Thou most unjust, most odious in our eyes!Inhuman discord is thy dire
delight,The waste of slaughter, and the rage of fight.No bounds, no law, thy
fiery temper quells,And all thy mother in thy soul rebels.In vain our threats,
in vain our power we use;She gives the example, and her son pursues.Yet long the
inflicted pangs thou shall not mourn,Sprung since thou art from Jove, and
heavenly-born.Else, singed with lightning, hadst thou hence been thrown,Where
chain’d on burning rocks the Titans groan.”Thus he who shakes Olympus with his
nod;Then gave to Pæon’s care the bleeding god.[160]With gentle hand the balm he
pour’d around,And heal’d the immortal flesh, and closed the wound.As when the
fig’s press’d juice, infused in cream,To curds coagulates the liquid
stream,Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined;Such, and so soon, the ethereal
texture join’d.Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dress’dHis mighty
limbs in an immortal vest.Glorious he sat, in majesty restored,Fast by the
throne of heaven’s superior lord.Juno and Pallas mount the bless’d abodes,Their
task perform’d, and mix among the gods.[Illustration: ] JUNOBOOK VI.ARGUMENT.THE
EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.The gods having
left the field, the Grecians prevail. Helenus, thechief augur of Troy, commands
Hector to return to the city, in order toappoint a solemn procession of the
queen and the Trojan matrons to thetemple of Minerva, to entreat her to remove
Diomed from the fight. Thebattle relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus
and Diomed havean interview between the two armies; where, coming to the
knowledge, ofthe friendship and hospitality passed between their ancestors,
theymake exchange of their arms. Hector, having performed the orders ofHelenus,
prevails upon Paris to return to the battle, and, taking atender leave of his
wife Andromache, hastens again to the field. The scene is first in the field of
battle, between the rivers Simois and Scamander, and then changes to Troy.Now
heaven forsakes the fight: the immortals yieldTo human force and human skill the
field:Dark showers of javelins fly from foes to foes;Now here, now there, the
tide of combat flows;While Troy’s famed streams, that bound the deathful plainOn
either side, run purple to the main.Great Ajax first to conquest led the
way,Broke the thick ranks, and turn’d the doubtful day.The Thracian Acamas his
falchion found,And hew’d the enormous giant to the ground;His thundering arm a
deadly stroke impress’dWhere the black horse-hair nodded o’er his crest;Fix’d in
his front the brazen weapon lies,And seals in endless shades his swimming
eyes.Next Teuthras’ son distain’d the sands with blood,Axylus, hospitable, rich,
and good:In fair Arisbe’s walls (his native place)[161]He held his seat! a
friend to human race.Fast by the road, his ever-open doorObliged the wealthy,
and relieved the poor.To stern Tydides now he falls a prey,No friend to guard
him in the dreadful day!Breathless the good man fell, and by his sideHis
faithful servant, old Calesius died.By great Euryalus was Dresus slain,And next
he laid Opheltius on the plain.Two twins were near, bold, beautiful, and
young,From a fair naiad and Bucolion sprung:(Laomedon’s white flocks Bucolion
fed,That monarch’s first-born by a foreign bed;In secret woods he won the
naiad’s grace,And two fair infants crown’d his strong embrace:)Here dead they
lay in all their youthful charms;The ruthless victor stripp’d their shining
arms.Astyalus by Polypœtes fell;Ulysses’ spear Pidytes sent to hell;By Teucer’s
shaft brave Aretaon bled,And Nestor’s son laid stern Ablerus dead;Great
Agamemnon, leader of the brave,The mortal wound of rich Elatus gave,Who held in
Pedasus his proud abode,[162]And till’d the banks where silver Satnio
flow’d.Melanthius by Eurypylus was slain;And Phylacus from Leitus flies in
vain.Unbless’d Adrastus next at mercy liesBeneath the Spartan spear, a living
prize.Scared with the din and tumult of the fight,His headlong steeds,
precipitate in flight,Rush’d on a tamarisk’s strong trunk, and brokeThe
shatter’d chariot from the crooked yoke;Wide o’er the field, resistless as the
wind,For Troy they fly, and leave their lord behind.Prone on his face he sinks
beside the wheel:Atrides o’er him shakes his vengeful steel;The fallen chief in
suppliant posture press’dThe victor’s knees, and thus his prayer address’d:“O
spare my youth, and for the life I oweLarge gifts of price my father shall
bestow.When fame shall tell, that, not in battle slain,Thy hollow ships his
captive son detain:Rich heaps of brass shall in thy tent be told,[163]And steel
well-temper’d, and persuasive gold.”He said: compassion touch’d the hero’s
heartHe stood, suspended with the lifted dart:As pity pleaded for his vanquish’d
prize,Stern Agamemnon swift to vengeance flies,And, furious, thus: “Oh impotent
of mind![164]Shall these, shall these Atrides’ mercy find?Well hast thou known
proud Troy’s perfidious land,And well her natives merit at thy hand!Not one of
all the race, nor sex, nor age,Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage:Ilion
shall perish whole, and bury all;Her babes, her infants at the breast, shall
fall;[165]A dreadful lesson of exampled fate,To warn the nations, and to curb
the great!”The monarch spoke; the words, with warmth address’d,To rigid justice
steel’d his brother’s breast.Fierce from his knees the hapless chief he
thrust;The monarch’s javelin stretch’d him in the dust,Then pressing with his
foot his panting heart,Forth from the slain he tugg’d the reeking dart.Old
Nestor saw, and roused the warrior’s rage;“Thus, heroes! thus the vigorous
combat wage;No son of Mars descend, for servile gains,To touch the booty, while
a foe remains.Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil!First gain the
conquest, then reward the toil.”And now had Greece eternal fame acquired,And
frighted Troy within her walls, retired,Had not sage Helenus her state
redress’d,Taught by the gods that moved his sacred breast.Where Hector stood,
with great Æneas join’d,The seer reveal’d the counsels of his mind:“Ye generous
chiefs! on whom the immortals layThe cares and glories of this doubtful day;On
whom your aids, your country’s hopes depend;Wise to consult, and active to
defend!Here, at our gates, your brave efforts unite,Turn back the routed, and
forbid the flight,Ere yet their wives’ soft arms the cowards gain,The sport and
insult of the hostile train.When your commands have hearten’d every
band,Ourselves, here fix’d, will make the dangerous stand;Press’d as we are, and
sore of former fight,These straits demand our last remains of might.Meanwhile
thou, Hector, to the town retire,And teach our mother what the gods
require:Direct the queen to lead the assembled trainOf Troy’s chief matrons to
Minerva’s fane;[166]Unbar the sacred gates, and seek the power,With offer’d
vows, in Ilion’s topmost tower.The largest mantle her rich wardrobes hold,Most
prized for art, and labour’d o’er with gold,Before the goddess’ honour’d knees
be spread,And twelve young heifers to her altars led:If so the power, atoned by
fervent prayer,Our wives, our infants, and our city spare,And far avert Tydides’
wasteful ire,That mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire;Not thus Achilles
taught our hosts to dread,Sprung though he was from more than mortal bed;Not
thus resistless ruled the stream of fight,In rage unbounded, and unmatch’d in
might.”Hector obedient heard: and, with a bound,Leap’d from his trembling
chariot to the ground;Through all his host inspiring force he flies,And bids the
thunder of the battle rise.With rage recruited the bold Trojans glow,And turn
the tide of conflict on the foe:Fierce in the front he shakes two dazzling
spears;All Greece recedes, and ’midst her triumphs fears;Some god, they thought,
who ruled the fate of wars,Shot down avenging from the vault of stars.Then thus
aloud: “Ye dauntless Dardans, hear!And you whom distant nations send to war!Be
mindful of the strength your fathers bore;Be still yourselves, and Hector asks
no more.One hour demands me in the Trojan wall,To bid our altars flame, and
victims fall:Nor shall, I trust, the matrons’ holy train,And reverend elders,
seek the gods in vain.”This said, with ample strides the hero pass’d;The
shield’s large orb behind his shoulder cast,His neck o’ershading, to his ankle
hung;And as he march’d the brazen buckler rung.Now paused the battle (godlike
Hector gone),[167]Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeus’ sonBetween both armies
met: the chiefs from farObserved each other, and had mark’d for war.Near as they
drew, Tydides thus began:“What art thou, boldest of the race of man?Our eyes
till now that aspect ne’er beheld,Where fame is reap’d amid the embattled
field;Yet far before the troops thou dar’st appear,And meet a lance the fiercest
heroes fear.Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires,Who tempt our fury when
Minerva fires!But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend,Know with immortals we
no more contend.Not long Lycurgus view’d the golden light,That daring man who
mix’d with gods in fight.Bacchus, and Bacchus’ votaries, he drove,With
brandish’d steel, from Nyssa’s sacred grove:Their consecrated spears lay
scatter’d round,With curling vines and twisted ivy bound;While Bacchus headlong
sought the briny flood,And Thetis’ arms received the trembling god.Nor fail’d
the crime the immortals’ wrath to move;(The immortals bless’d with endless ease
above;)Deprived of sight by their avenging doom,Cheerless he breathed, and
wander’d in the gloom,Then sunk unpitied to the dire abodes,A wretch accursed,
and hated by the gods!I brave not heaven: but if the fruits of earthSustain thy
life, and human be thy birth,Bold as thou art, too prodigal of breath,Approach,
and enter the dark gates of death.”“What, or from whence I am, or who my
sire,(Replied the chief,) can Tydeus’ son inquire?Like leaves on trees the race
of man is found,Now green in youth, now withering on the ground;Another race the
following spring supplies;They fall successive, and successive rise:So
generations in their course decay;So flourish these, when those are pass’d
away.But if thou still persist to search my birth,Then hear a tale that fills
the spacious earth.“A city stands on Argos’ utmost bound,(Argos the fair, for
warlike steeds renown’d,)Æolian Sisyphus, with wisdom bless’d,In ancient time
the happy wall possess’d,Then call’d Ephyre: Glaucus was his son;Great Glaucus,
father of Bellerophon,Who o’er the sons of men in beauty shined,Loved for that
valour which preserves mankind.Then mighty Praetus Argos’ sceptre sway’d,Whose
hard commands Bellerophon obey’d.With direful jealousy the monarch raged,And the
brave prince in numerous toils engaged.For him Antaea burn’d with lawless
flame,And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame:In vain she tempted the
relentless youth,Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth.Fired at his scorn
the queen to Praetus fled,And begg’d revenge for her insulted bed:Incensed he
heard, resolving on his fate;But hospitable laws restrain’d his hate:To Lycia
the devoted youth he sent,With tablets seal’d, that told his dire
intent.[168]Now bless’d by every power who guards the good,The chief arrived at
Xanthus’ silver flood:There Lycia’s monarch paid him honours due,Nine days he
feasted, and nine bulls he slew.But when the tenth bright morning orient
glow’d,The faithful youth his monarch’s mandate show’d:The fatal tablets, till
that instant seal’d,The deathful secret to the king reveal’d.First, dire
Chimaera’s conquest was enjoin’d;A mingled monster of no mortal kind!Behind, a
dragon’s fiery tail was spread;A goat’s rough body bore a lion’s head;Her pitchy
nostrils flaky flames expire;Her gaping throat emits infernal fire.“This pest he
slaughter’d, (for he read the skies,And trusted heaven’s informing
prodigies,)Then met in arms the Solymæan crew,[169](Fiercest of men,) and those
the warrior slew;Next the bold Amazons’ whole force defied;And conquer’d still,
for heaven was on his side.“Nor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes,At his
return, a treacherous ambush rose,With levell’d spears along the winding
shore:There fell they breathless, and return’d no more.“At length the monarch,
with repentant grief,Confess’d the gods, and god-descended chief;His daughter
gave, the stranger to detain,With half the honours of his ample reign:The
Lycians grant a chosen space of ground,With woods, with vineyards, and with
harvests crown’d.There long the chief his happy lot possess’d,With two brave
sons and one fair daughter bless’d;(Fair e’en in heavenly eyes: her fruitful
loveCrown’d with Sarpedon’s birth the embrace of Jove;)But when at last,
distracted in his mind,Forsook by heaven, forsaking humankind,Wide o’er the
Aleian field he chose to stray,A long, forlorn, uncomfortable way![170]Woes
heap’d on woes consumed his wasted heart:His beauteous daughter fell by Phoebe’s
dart;His eldest born by raging Mars was slain,In combat on the Solymaean
plain.Hippolochus survived: from him I came,The honour’d author of my birth and
name;By his decree I sought the Trojan town;By his instructions learn to win
renown,To stand the first in worth as in command,To add new honours to my native
land,Before my eyes my mighty sires to place,And emulate the glories of our
race.”He spoke, and transport fill’d Tydides’ heart;In earth the generous
warrior fix’d his dart,Then friendly, thus the Lycian prince address’d:“Welcome,
my brave hereditary guest!Thus ever let us meet, with kind embrace,Nor stain the
sacred friendship of our race.Know, chief, our grandsires have been guests of
old;Œneus the strong, Bellerophon the bold:Our ancient seat his honour’d
presence graced,Where twenty days in genial rites he pass’d.The parting heroes
mutual presents left;A golden goblet was thy grandsire’s gift;Œneus a belt of
matchless work bestowed,That rich with Tyrian dye refulgent glow’d.(This from
his pledge I learn’d, which, safely storedAmong my treasures, still adorns my
board:For Tydeus left me young, when Thebe’s wallBeheld the sons of Greece
untimely fall.)Mindful of this, in friendship let us join;If heaven our steps to
foreign lands incline,My guest in Argos thou, and I in Lycia thine.Enough of
Trojans to this lance shall yield,In the full harvest of yon ample field;Enough
of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore;But thou and Diomed be foes no more.Now
change we arms, and prove to either hostWe guard the friendship of the line we
boast.”Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight,Their hands they join, their
mutual faith they plight;Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resign’d,(Jove
warm’d his bosom, and enlarged his mind,)For Diomed’s brass arms, of mean
device,For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,)He gave his own, of gold
divinely wrought,[171]A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought.Meantime the
guardian of the Trojan state,Great Hector, enter’d at the Scæan
gate.[172]Beneath the beech-tree’s consecrated shades,The Trojan matrons and the
Trojan maidsAround him flock’d, all press’d with pious careFor husbands,
brothers, sons, engaged in war.He bids the train in long procession go,And seek
the gods, to avert the impending woe.And now to Priam’s stately courts he
came,Rais’d on arch’d columns of stupendous frame;O’er these a range of marble
structure runs,The rich pavilions of his fifty sons,In fifty chambers lodged:
and rooms of state,[173]Opposed to those, where Priam’s daughters sate.Twelve
domes for them and their loved spouses shone,Of equal beauty, and of polish’d
stone.Hither great Hector pass’d, nor pass’d unseenOf royal Hecuba, his
mother-queen.(With her Laodice, whose beauteous faceSurpass’d the nymphs of
Troy’s illustrious race.)Long in a strict embrace she held her son,And press’d
his hand, and tender thus begun:“O Hector! say, what great occasion callsMy son
from fight, when Greece surrounds our walls;Com’st thou to supplicate the
almighty powerWith lifted hands, from Ilion’s lofty tower?Stay, till I bring the
cup with Bacchus crown’d,In Jove’s high name, to sprinkle on the ground,And pay
due vows to all the gods around.Then with a plenteous draught refresh thy
soul,And draw new spirits from the generous bowl;Spent as thou art with long
laborious fight,The brave defender of thy country’s right.”“Far hence be
Bacchus’ gifts; (the chief rejoin’d;)Inflaming wine, pernicious to
mankind,Unnerves the limbs, and dulls the noble mind.Let chiefs abstain, and
spare the sacred juiceTo sprinkle to the gods, its better use.By me that holy
office were profaned;Ill fits it me, with human gore distain’d,To the pure skies
these horrid hands to raise,Or offer heaven’s great Sire polluted praise.You,
with your matrons, go! a spotless train,And burn rich odours in Minerva’s
fane.The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold,Most prized for art, and
labour’d o’er with gold,Before the goddess’ honour’d knees be spread,And twelve
young heifers to her altar led.So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer,Our
wives, our infants, and our city spare;And far avert Tydides’ wasteful ire,Who
mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire.Be this, O mother, your religious
care:I go to rouse soft Paris to the war;If yet not lost to all the sense of
shame,The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame.Oh, would kind earth the
hateful wretch embrace,That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race![174]Deep to the
dark abyss might he descend,Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end.”This
heard, she gave command: and summon’d cameEach noble matron and illustrious
dame.The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went,Where treasured odours
breathed a costly scent.There lay the vestures of no vulgar art,Sidonian maids
embroider’d every part,Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore,With Helen
touching on the Tyrian shore.Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyesThe
various textures and the various dyes,She chose a veil that shone superior
far,And glow’d refulgent as the morning star.Herself with this the long
procession leads;The train majestically slow proceeds.Soon as to Ilion’s topmost
tower they come,And awful reach the high Palladian dome,Antenor’s consort, fair
Theano, waitsAs Pallas’ priestess, and unbars the gates.With hands uplifted and
imploring eyes,They fill the dome with supplicating cries.The priestess then the
shining veil displays,Placed on Minerva’s knees, and thus she prays:“Oh awful
goddess! ever-dreadful maid,Troy’s strong defence, unconquer’d Pallas, aid!Break
thou Tydides’ spear, and let him fallProne on the dust before the Trojan wall!So
twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke,Shall fill thy temple with a
grateful smoke.But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer,Ourselves, our infants,
and our city spare!”So pray’d the priestess in her holy fane;So vow’d the
matrons, but they vow’d in vain.While these appear before the power with
prayers,Hector to Paris’ lofty dome repairs.[175]Himself the mansion raised,
from every partAssembling architects of matchless art.Near Priam’s court and
Hector’s palace standsThe pompous structure, and the town commands.A spear the
hero bore of wondrous strength,Of full ten cubits was the lance’s length,The
steely point with golden ringlets join’d,Before him brandish’d, at each motion
shinedThus entering, in the glittering rooms he foundHis brother-chief, whose
useless arms lay round,His eyes delighting with their splendid show,Brightening
the shield, and polishing the bow.Beside him Helen with her virgins
stands,Guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands.Him thus inactive,
with an ardent lookThe prince beheld, and high-resenting spoke.“Thy hate to
Troy, is this the time to show?(O wretch ill-fated, and thy country’s foe!)Paris
and Greece against us both conspire,Thy close resentment, and their vengeful
ire.For thee great Ilion’s guardian heroes fall,Till heaps of dead alone defend
her wall,For thee the soldier bleeds, the matron mourns,And wasteful war in all
its fury burns.Ungrateful man! deserves not this thy care,Our troops to hearten,
and our toils to share?Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend,And all the
Phrygian glories at an end.”“Brother, ’tis just, (replied the beauteous
youth,)Thy free remonstrance proves thy worth and truth:Yet charge my absence
less, O generous chief!On hate to Troy, than conscious shame and grief:Here, hid
from human eyes, thy brother sate,And mourn’d, in secret, his and Ilion’s
fate.’Tis now enough; now glory spreads her charms,And beauteous Helen calls her
chief to arms.Conquest to-day my happier sword may bless,’Tis man’s to fight,
but heaven’s to give success.But while I arm, contain thy ardent mind;Or go, and
Paris shall not lag behind.”[Illustration: ] HECTOR CHIDING PARISHe said, nor
answer’d Priam’s warlike son;When Helen thus with lowly grace begun:“Oh,
generous brother! (if the guilty dameThat caused these woes deserve a sister’s
name!)Would heaven, ere all these dreadful deeds were done,The day that show’d
me to the golden sunHad seen my death! why did not whirlwinds bearThe fatal
infant to the fowls of air?Why sunk I not beneath the whelming tide,And midst
the roarings of the waters died?Heaven fill’d up all my ills, and I accursedBore
all, and Paris of those ills the worst.Helen at least a braver spouse might
claim,Warm’d with some virtue, some regard of fame!Now tired with toils, thy
fainting limbs recline,With toils, sustain’d for Paris’ sake and mineThe gods
have link’d our miserable doom,Our present woe, and infamy to come:Wide shall it
spread, and last through ages long,Example sad! and theme of future song.”The
chief replied: “This time forbids to rest;The Trojan bands, by hostile fury
press’d,Demand their Hector, and his arm require;The combat urges, and my soul’s
on fire.Urge thou thy knight to march where glory calls,And timely join me, ere
I leave the walls.Ere yet I mingle in the direful fray,My wife, my infant, claim
a moment’s stay;This day (perhaps the last that sees me here)Demands a parting
word, a tender tear:This day, some god who hates our Trojan landMay vanquish
Hector by a Grecian hand.”He said, and pass’d with sad presaging heartTo seek
his spouse, his soul’s far dearer part;At home he sought her, but he sought in
vain;She, with one maid of all her menial train,Had hence retired; and with her
second joy,The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,Pensive she stood on Ilion’s
towery height,Beheld the war, and sicken’d at the sight;There her sad eyes in
vain her lord explore,Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore.But he who
found not whom his soul desired,Whose virtue charm’d him as her beauty
fired,Stood in the gates, and ask’d “what way she bentHer parting step? If to
the fane she went,Where late the mourning matrons made resort;Or sought her
sisters in the Trojan court?”“Not to the court, (replied the attendant
train,)Nor mix’d with matrons to Minerva’s fane:To Ilion’s steepy tower she bent
her way,To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.Troy fled, she heard, before
the Grecian sword;She heard, and trembled for her absent lord:Distracted with
surprise, she seem’d to fly,Fear on her cheek, and sorrow in her eye.The nurse
attended with her infant boy,The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy.”Hector this
heard, return’d without delay;Swift through the town he trod his former
way,Through streets of palaces, and walks of state;And met the mourner at the
Scæan gate.With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.His blameless wife,
Aëtion’s wealthy heir(Cilician Thebe great Aëtion sway’d,And Hippoplacus’ wide
extended shade):The nurse stood near, in whose embraces press’d,His only hope
hung smiling at her breast,Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,Fair as
the new-born star that gilds the morn.To this loved infant Hector gave the
nameScamandrius, from Scamander’s honour’d stream;Astyanax the Trojans call’d
the boy,From his great father, the defence of Troy.Silent the warrior smiled,
and pleased resign’dTo tender passions all his mighty mind;His beauteous
princess cast a mournful look,Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke;Her
bosom laboured with a boding sigh,And the big tear stood trembling in her
eye.[Illustration: ] THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE“Too daring prince! ah,
whither dost thou run?Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son!And think’st thou
not how wretched we shall be,A widow I, a helpless orphan he?For sure such
courage length of life denies,And thou must fall, thy virtue’s sacrifice.Greece
in her single heroes strove in vain;Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be
slain.O grant me, gods, ere Hector meets his doom,All I can ask of heaven, an
early tomb!So shall my days in one sad tenor run,And end with sorrows as they
first begun.No parent now remains my griefs to share,No father’s aid, no
mother’s tender care.The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire,Laid Thebe
waste, and slew my warlike sire!His fate compassion in the victor bred;Stern as
he was, he yet revered the dead,His radiant arms preserved from hostile
spoil,And laid him decent on the funeral pile;Then raised a mountain where his
bones were burn’d,The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adorn’d,Jove’s sylvan
daughters bade their elms bestowA barren shade, and in his honour grow.“By the
same arm my seven brave brothers fell;In one sad day beheld the gates of
hell;While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed,Amid their fields the hapless
heroes bled!My mother lived to wear the victor’s bands,The queen of
Hippoplacia’s sylvan lands:Redeem’d too late, she scarce beheld againHer
pleasing empire and her native plain,When ah! oppress’d by life-consuming
woe,She fell a victim to Diana’s bow.“Yet while my Hector still survives, I
seeMy father, mother, brethren, all, in thee:Alas! my parents, brothers,
kindred, allOnce more will perish, if my Hector fall,Thy wife, thy infant, in
thy danger share:Oh, prove a husband’s and a father’s care!That quarter most the
skilful Greeks annoy,Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy;Thou, from
this tower defend the important post;There Agamemnon points his dreadful
host,That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain,And there the vengeful Spartan
fires his train.Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,Or led by
hopes, or dictated from heaven.Let others in the field their arms employ,But
stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy.”The chief replied: “That post shall be
my care,Not that alone, but all the works of war.How would the sons of Troy, in
arms renown’d,And Troy’s proud dames, whose garments sweep the groundAttaint the
lustre of my former name,Should Hector basely quit the field of fame?My early
youth was bred to martial pains,My soul impels me to the embattled plains!Let me
be foremost to defend the throne,And guard my father’s glories, and my own.“Yet
come it will, the day decreed by fates!(How my heart trembles while my tongue
relates!)The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend,And see thy warriors fall,
thy glories end.And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,My mother’s death, the
ruin of my kind,Not Priam’s hoary hairs defiled with gore,Not all my brothers
gasping on the shore;As thine, Andromache! Thy griefs I dread:I see thee
trembling, weeping, captive led!In Argive looms our battles to design,And woes,
of which so large a part was thine!To bear the victor’s hard commands, or
bringThe weight of waters from Hyperia’s spring.There while you groan beneath
the load of life,They cry, ‘Behold the mighty Hector’s wife!’Some haughty Greek,
who lives thy tears to see,Imbitters all thy woes, by naming me.The thoughts of
glory past, and present shame,A thousand griefs shall waken at the name!May I
lie cold before that dreadful day,Press’d with a load of monumental clay!Thy
Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep,Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee
weep.”Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of TroyStretch’d his fond arms to
clasp the lovely boy.The babe clung crying to his nurse’s breast,Scared at the
dazzling helm, and nodding crest.With secret pleasure each fond parent
smiled,And Hector hasted to relieve his child,The glittering terrors from his
brows unbound,And placed the beaming helmet on the ground;Then kiss’d the child,
and, lifting high in air,Thus to the gods preferr’d a father’s prayer:“O thou!
whose glory fills the ethereal throne,And all ye deathless powers! protect my
son!Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,To guard the Trojans, to defend
the crown,Against his country’s foes the war to wage,And rise the Hector of the
future age!So when triumphant from successful toilsOf heroes slain he bears the
reeking spoils,Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,And say, ‘This
chief transcends his father’s fame:’While pleased amidst the general shouts of
Troy,His mother’s conscious heart o’erflows with joy.”He spoke, and fondly
gazing on her charms,Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;Soft on her
fragrant breast the babe she laid,Hush’d to repose, and with a smile
survey’d.The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,She mingled with a smile a
tender tear.The soften’d chief with kind compassion view’d,And dried the falling
drops, and thus pursued:“Andromache! my soul’s far better part,Why with untimely
sorrows heaves thy heart?No hostile hand can antedate my doom,Till fate condemns
me to the silent tomb.Fix’d is the term to all the race of earth;And such the
hard condition of our birth:No force can then resist, no flight can save,All
sink alike, the fearful and the brave.No more—but hasten to thy tasks at
home,There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:Me glory summons to the
martial scene,The field of combat is the sphere for men.Where heroes war, the
foremost place I claim,The first in danger as the first in fame.”Thus having
said, the glorious chief resumesHis towery helmet, black with shading plumes.His
princess parts with a prophetic sigh,Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her
eyeThat stream’d at every look; then, moving slow,Sought her own palace, and
indulged her woe.There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,Through all her
train the soft infection ran;The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,And
mourn the living Hector, as the dead.But now, no longer deaf to honour’s
call,Forth issues Paris from the palace wall.In brazen arms that cast a gleamy
ray,Swift through the town the warrior bends his way.The wanton courser thus
with reins unbound[176]Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling
ground;Pamper’d and proud, he seeks the wonted tides,And laves, in height of
blood his shining sides;His head now freed, he tosses to the skies;His mane
dishevell’d o’er his shoulders flies;He snuffs the females in the distant
plain,And springs, exulting, to his fields again.With equal triumph, sprightly,
bold, and gay,In arms refulgent as the god of day,The son of Priam, glorying in
his might,Rush’d forth with Hector to the fields of fight.And now, the warriors
passing on the way,The graceful Paris first excused his stay.To whom the noble
Hector thus replied:“O chief! in blood, and now in arms, allied!Thy power in war
with justice none contest;Known is thy courage, and thy strength confess’d.What
pity sloth should seize a soul so brave,Or godlike Paris live a woman’s slave!My
heart weeps blood at what the Trojans say,And hopes thy deeds shall wipe the
stain away.Haste then, in all their glorious labours share,For much they suffer,
for thy sake, in war.These ills shall cease, whene’er by Jove’s decreeWe crown
the bowl to heaven and liberty:While the proud foe his frustrate triumphs
mourns,And Greece indignant through her seas returns.”[Illustration: ] BOWS AND
BOW CASE[Illustration: ] IRISBOOK VII.ARGUMENTTHE SINGLE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND
AJAX.The battle renewing with double ardour upon the return of Hector,Minerva is
under apprehensions for the Greeks. Apollo, seeing herdescend from Olympus,
joins her near the Scæan gate. They agree to putoff the general engagement for
that day, and incite Hector to challengethe Greeks to a single combat. Nine of
the princes accepting thechallenge, the lot is cast and falls upon Ajax. These
heroes, afterseveral attacks, are parted by the night. The Trojans calling
acouncil, Antenor purposes the delivery of Helen to the Greeks, to whichParis
will not consent, but offers to restore them her riches. Priamsends a herald to
make this offer, and to demand a truce for burningthe dead, the last of which
only is agreed to by Agamemnon. When thefunerals are performed, the Greeks,
pursuant to the advice of Nestor,erect a fortification to protect their fleet
and camp, flanked withtowers, and defended by a ditch and palisades. Neptune
testifies hisjealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from Jupiter.
Botharmies pass the night in feasting but Jupiter disheartens the Trojanswith
thunder, and other signs of his wrath. The three and twentieth day ends with the
duel of Hector and Ajax, the next day the truce is agreed; another is taken up
in the funeral rites of the slain and one more in building the fortification
before the ships. So that somewhat about three days is employed in this book.
The scene lies wholly in the field.So spoke the guardian of the Trojan
state,Then rush’d impetuous through the Scæan gate.Him Paris follow’d to the
dire alarms;Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.As when to sailors
labouring through the main,That long have heaved the weary oar in vain,Jove bids
at length the expected gales arise;The gales blow grateful, and the vessel
flies.So welcome these to Troy’s desiring train,The bands are cheer’d, the war
awakes again.Bold Paris first the work of death begunOn great Menestheus,
Areithous’ son,Sprung from the fair Philomeda’s embrace,The pleasing Arnè was
his native place.Then sunk Eioneus to the shades below,Beneath his steely
casque[177] he felt the blowFull on his neck, from Hector’s weighty hand;And
roll’d, with limbs relax’d, along the land.By Glaucus’ spear the bold Iphinous
bleeds,Fix’d in the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;Headlong he tumbles: his
slack nerves unbound,Drop the cold useless members on the ground.When now
Minerva saw her Argives slain,From vast Olympus to the gleaming plainFierce she
descends: Apollo marked her flight,Nor shot less swift from Ilion’s towery
height.Radiant they met, beneath the beechen shade;When thus Apollo to the
blue-eyed maid:“What cause, O daughter of Almighty Jove!Thus wings thy progress
from the realms above?Once more impetuous dost thou bend thy way,To give to
Greece the long divided day?Too much has Troy already felt thy hate,Now breathe
thy rage, and hush the stern debate;This day, the business of the field
suspend;War soon shall kindle, and great Ilion bend;Since vengeful goddesses
confederate joinTo raze her walls, though built by hands divine.”To whom the
progeny of Jove replies:“I left, for this, the council of the skies:But who
shall bid conflicting hosts forbear,What art shall calm the furious sons of
war?”To her the god: “Great Hector’s soul inciteTo dare the boldest Greek to
single fight,Till Greece, provoked, from all her numbers showA warrior worthy to
be Hector’s foe.”At this agreed, the heavenly powers withdrew;Sage Helenus their
secret counsels knew;Hector, inspired, he sought: to him address’d,Thus told the
dictates of his sacred breast:“O son of Priam! let thy faithful earReceive my
words: thy friend and brother hear!Go forth persuasive, and a while engageThe
warring nations to suspend their rage;Then dare the boldest of the hostile
trainTo mortal combat on the listed plain.For not this day shall end thy
glorious date;The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate.”He said: the
warrior heard the word with joy;Then with his spear restrain’d the youth of
Troy,Held by the midst athwart. On either handThe squadrons part; the expecting
Trojans stand;Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear:They breathe, and hush the
tumult of the war.The Athenian maid,[178] and glorious god of day,With silent
joy the settling hosts survey:In form of vultures, on the beech’s heightThey sit
conceal’d, and wait the future fight.The thronging troops obscure the dusky
fields,Horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields.As when a general
darkness veils the main,(Soft Zephyr curling the wide wat’ry plain,)The waves
scarce heave, the face of ocean sleeps,And a still horror saddens all the
deeps;Thus in thick orders settling wide around,At length composed they sit, and
shade the ground.Great Hector first amidst both armies brokeThe solemn silence,
and their powers bespoke:“Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,What my soul
prompts, and what some god commands.Great Jove, averse our warfare to
compose,O’erwhelms the nations with new toils and woes;War with a fiercer tide
once more returns,Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns.You then, O princes
of the Greeks! appear;’Tis Hector speaks, and calls the gods to hear:From all
your troops select the boldest knight,And him, the boldest, Hector dares to
fight.Here if I fall, by chance of battle slain,Be his my spoil, and his these
arms remain;But let my body, to my friends return’d,By Trojan hands and Trojan
flames be burn’d.And if Apollo, in whose aid I trust,Shall stretch your daring
champion in the dust;If mine the glory to despoil the foe;On Phœbus’ temple I’ll
his arms bestow:The breathless carcase to your navy sent,Greece on the shore
shall raise a monument;Which when some future mariner surveys,Wash’d by broad
Hellespont’s resounding seas,Thus shall he say, ‘A valiant Greek lies there,By
Hector slain, the mighty man of war,’The stone shall tell your vanquish’d hero’s
nameAnd distant ages learn the victor’s fame.”This fierce defiance Greece
astonish’d heard,Blush’d to refuse, and to accept it fear’d.Stern Menelaus first
the silence broke,And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke:“Women of Greece! O
scandal of your race,Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace,How great the
shame, when every age shall knowThat not a Grecian met this noble foe!Go then!
resolve to earth, from whence ye grew,A heartless, spiritless, inglorious
crew!Be what ye seem, unanimated clay,Myself will dare the danger of the
day;’Tis man’s bold task the generous strife to try,But in the hands of God is
victory.”These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour press’d,His manly limbs
in azure arms he dress’d.That day, Atrides! a superior handHad stretch’d thee
breathless on the hostile strand;But all at once, thy fury to compose,The kings
of Greece, an awful band, arose;Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, press’dThy
daring hand, and this advice address’d:“Whither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou
run,And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?Grieved though thou art,
forbear the rash design;Great Hector’s arm is mightier far than thine:Even
fierce Achilles learn’d its force to fear,And trembling met this dreadful son of
war.Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band;Greece in our cause shall arm some
powerful hand.The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name,Though bold and burning
with desire of fame,Content the doubtful honour might forego,So great the
danger, and so brave the foe.”He said, and turn’d his brother’s vengeful mind;He
stoop’d to reason, and his rage resign’d,No longer bent to rush on certain
harms;His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.He from whose lips divine
persuasion flows,Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose;Thus to the kings he
spoke: “What grief, what shameAttend on Greece, and all the Grecian name!How
shall, alas! her hoary heroes mournTheir sons degenerate, and their race a
scorn!What tears shall down thy silvery beard be roll’d,O Peleus, old in arms,
in wisdom old!Once with what joy the generous prince would hearOf every chief
who fought this glorious war,Participate their fame, and pleased inquireEach
name, each action, and each hero’s sire!Gods! should he see our warriors
trembling stand,And trembling all before one hostile hand;How would he lift his
aged arms on high,Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die!Oh! would to all the
immortal powers above,Minerva, Phœbus, and almighty Jove!Years might again roll
back, my youth renew,And give this arm the spring which once it knewWhen fierce
in war, where Jardan’s waters fall,I led my troops to Phea’s trembling wall,And
with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried,Where Celadon rolls down his rapid
tide.[179]There Ereuthalion braved us in the field,Proud Areithous’ dreadful
arms to wield;Great Areithous, known from shore to shoreBy the huge, knotted,
iron mace he bore;No lance he shook, nor bent the twanging bow,But broke, with
this, the battle of the foe.Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew,Whose guileful
javelin from the thicket flew,Deep in a winding way his breast assailed,Nor
aught the warrior’s thundering mace avail’d.Supine he fell: those arms which
Mars beforeHad given the vanquish’d, now the victor bore:But when old age had
dimm’d Lycurgus’ eyes,To Ereuthalion he consign’d the prize.Furious with this he
crush’d our levell’d bands,And dared the trial of the strongest hands;Nor could
the strongest hands his fury stay:All saw, and fear’d, his huge tempestuous
swayTill I, the youngest of the host, appear’d,And, youngest, met whom all our
army fear’d.I fought the chief: my arms Minerva crown’d:Prone fell the giant
o’er a length of ground.What then I was, O were your Nestor now!Not Hector’s
self should want an equal foe.But, warriors, you that youthful vigour boast,The
flower of Greece, the examples of our host,Sprung from such fathers, who such
numbers sway,Can you stand trembling, and desert the day?”His warm reproofs the
listening kings inflame;And nine, the noblest of the Grecian name,Up-started
fierce: but far before the restThe king of men advanced his dauntless
breast:Then bold Tydides, great in arms, appear’d;And next his bulk gigantic
Ajax rear’d;Oïleus follow’d; Idomen was there,[180]And Merion, dreadful as the
god of war:With these Eurypylus and Thoas stand,And wise Ulysses closed the
daring band.All these, alike inspired with noble rage,Demand the fight. To whom
the Pylian sage:“Lest thirst of glory your brave souls divide,What chief shall
combat, let the gods decide.Whom heaven shall choose, be his the chance to
raiseHis country’s fame, his own immortal praise.”The lots produced, each hero
signs his own:Then in the general’s helm the fates are thrown,[181]The people
pray, with lifted eyes and hands,And vows like these ascend from all the
bands:“Grant, thou Almighty! in whose hand is fate,A worthy champion for the
Grecian state:This task let Ajax or Tydides prove,Or he, the king of kings,
beloved by Jove.”Old Nestor shook the casque. By heaven inspired,Leap’d forth
the lot, of every Greek desired.This from the right to left the herald
bears,Held out in order to the Grecian peers;Each to his rival yields the mark
unknown,Till godlike Ajax finds the lot his own;Surveys the inscription with
rejoicing eyes,Then casts before him, and with transport cries:“Warriors! I
claim the lot, and arm with joy;Be mine the conquest of this chief of Troy.Now
while my brightest arms my limbs invest,To Saturn’s son be all your vows
address’d:But pray in secret, lest the foes should hear,And deem your prayers
the mean effect of fear.Said I in secret? No, your vows declareIn such a voice
as fills the earth and air,Lives there a chief whom Ajax ought to dread?Ajax, in
all the toils of battle bred!From warlike Salamis I drew my birth,And, born to
combats, fear no force on earth.”He said. The troops with elevated eyes,Implore
the god whose thunder rends the skies:“O father of mankind, superior lord!On
lofty Ida’s holy hill adored:Who in the highest heaven hast fix’d thy
throne,Supreme of gods! unbounded and alone:Grant thou, that Telamon may bear
awayThe praise and conquest of this doubtful day;Or, if illustrious Hector be
thy care,That both may claim it, and that both may share.”Now Ajax braced his
dazzling armour on;Sheathed in bright steel the giant-warrior shone:He moves to
combat with majestic pace;So stalks in arms the grisly god of Thrace,[182]When
Jove to punish faithless men prepares,And gives whole nations to the waste of
wars,Thus march’d the chief, tremendous as a god;Grimly he smiled; earth
trembled as he strode:[183]His massy javelin quivering in his hand,He stood, the
bulwark of the Grecian band.Through every Argive heart new transport ran;All
Troy stood trembling at the mighty man:Even Hector paused; and with new doubt
oppress’d,Felt his great heart suspended in his breast:’Twas vain to seek
retreat, and vain to fear;Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.Stern
Telamon behind his ample shield,As from a brazen tower, o’erlook’d the
field.Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds o’ercast,Of tough bull-hides; of
solid brass the last,(The work of Tychius, who in Hylè dwell’dAnd in all arts of
armoury excell’d,)This Ajax bore before his manly breast,And, threatening, thus
his adverse chief address’d:“Hector! approach my arm, and singly knowWhat
strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.Achilles shuns the fight; yet some
there are,Not void of soul, and not unskill’d in war:Let him, unactive on the
sea-beat shore,Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more;Whole troops of
heroes Greece has yet to boast,And sends thee one, a sample of her host,Such as
I am, I come to prove thy might;No more—be sudden, and begin the fight.”“O son
of Telamon, thy country’s pride!(To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied)Me, as a
boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright,New to the field, and trembling at the
fight?Thou meet’st a chief deserving of thy arms,To combat born, and bred amidst
alarms:I know to shift my ground, remount the car,Turn, charge, and answer every
call of war;To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield,And bear thick battle
on my sounding shield/But open be our fight, and bold each blow;I steal no
conquest from a noble foe.”He said, and rising, high above the fieldWhirl’d the
long lance against the sevenfold shield.Full on the brass descending from
aboveThrough six bull-hides the furious weapon drove,Till in the seventh it
fix’d. Then Ajax threw;Through Hector’s shield the forceful javelin flew,His
corslet enters, and his garment rends,And glancing downwards, near his flank
descends.The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending lowBeneath his buckler,
disappoints the blow.From their bored shields the chiefs their javelins
drew,Then close impetuous, and the charge renew;Fierce as the mountain-lions
bathed in blood,Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.At Ajax, Hector his
long lance extends;The blunted point against the buckler bends;But Ajax,
watchful as his foe drew near,Drove through the Trojan targe the knotty spear;It
reach’d his neck, with matchless strength impell’d!Spouts the black gore, and
dims his shining shield.Yet ceased not Hector thus; but stooping down,In his
strong hand up-heaved a flinty stone,Black, craggy, vast: to this his force he
bends;Full on the brazen boss the stone descends;The hollow brass resounded with
the shock:Then Ajax seized the fragment of a rock,Applied each nerve, and
swinging round on high,With force tempestuous, let the ruin fly;The huge stone
thundering through his buckler broke:His slacken’d knees received the numbing
stroke;Great Hector falls extended on the field,His bulk supporting on the
shatter’d shield:Nor wanted heavenly aid: Apollo’s mightConfirm’d his sinews,
and restored to fight.And now both heroes their broad falchions drewIn flaming
circles round their heads they flew;But then by heralds’ voice the word was
given.The sacred ministers of earth and heaven:Divine Talthybius, whom the
Greeks employ,And sage Idæus on the part of Troy,Between the swords their
peaceful sceptres rear’d;And first Idæus’ awful voice was heard:[Illustration: ]
HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS“Forbear, my sons! your further force to
prove,Both dear to men, and both beloved of Jove.To either host your matchless
worth is known,Each sounds your praise, and war is all your own.But now the
Night extends her awful shade;The goddess parts you; be the night
obey’d.”[184]To whom great Ajax his high soul express’d:“O sage! to Hector be
these words address’d.Let him, who first provoked our chiefs to fight,Let him
demand the sanction of the night;If first he ask’d it, I content obey,And cease
the strife when Hector shows the way.”“O first of Greeks! (his noble foe
rejoin’d)Whom heaven adorns, superior to thy kind,With strength of body, and
with worth of mind!Now martial law commands us to forbear;Hereafter we shall
meet in glorious war,Some future day shall lengthen out the strife,And let the
gods decide of death or life!Since, then, the night extends her gloomy shade,And
heaven enjoins it, be the night obey’d.Return, brave Ajax, to thy Grecian
friends,And joy the nations whom thy arm defends;As I shall glad each chief, and
Trojan wife,Who wearies heaven with vows for Hector’s life.But let us, on this
memorable day,Exchange some gift: that Greece and Troy may say,‘Not hate, but
glory, made these chiefs contend;And each brave foe was in his soul a
friend.’”With that, a sword with stars of silver graced,The baldric studded, and
the sheath enchased,He gave the Greek. The generous Greek bestow’dA radiant belt
that rich with purple glow’d.Then with majestic grace they quit the plain;This
seeks the Grecian, that the Phrygian train.The Trojan bands returning Hector
wait,And hail with joy the Champion of their state;Escaped great Ajax, they
survey him round,Alive, unarm’d, and vigorous from his wound;To Troy’s high
gates the godlike man they bearTheir present triumph, as their late despair.But
Ajax, glorying in his hardy deed,The well-arm’d Greeks to Agamemnon lead.A steer
for sacrifice the king design’d,Of full five years, and of the nobler kind.The
victim falls; they strip the smoking hide,The beast they quarter, and the joints
divide;Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,Each takes his seat, and each
receives his share.The king himself (an honorary sign)Before great Ajax placed
the mighty chine.[185]When now the rage of hunger was removed,Nestor, in each
persuasive art approved,The sage whose counsels long had sway’d the rest,In
words like these his prudent thought express’d:“How dear, O kings! this fatal
day has cost,What Greeks are perish’d! what a people lost!What tides of blood
have drench’d Scamander’s shore!What crowds of heroes sunk to rise no more!Then
hear me, chief! nor let the morrow’s lightAwake thy squadrons to new toils of
fight:Some space at least permit the war to breathe,While we to flames our
slaughter’d friends bequeath,From the red field their scatter’d bodies bear,And
nigh the fleet a funeral structure rear;So decent urns their snowy bones may
keep,And pious children o’er their ashes weep.Here, where on one promiscuous
pile they blazed,High o’er them all a general tomb be raised;Next, to secure our
camp and naval powers,Raise an embattled wall, with lofty towers;From space to
space be ample gates around,For passing chariots; and a trench profound.So
Greece to combat shall in safety go,Nor fear the fierce incursions of the
foe.”’Twas thus the sage his wholesome counsel moved;The sceptred kings of
Greece his words approved.Meanwhile, convened at Priam’s palace-gate,The Trojan
peers in nightly council sate;A senate void of order, as of choice:Their hearts
were fearful, and confused their voice.Antenor, rising, thus demands their
ear:“Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliars, hear!’Tis heaven the counsel of my
breast inspires,And I but move what every god requires:Let Sparta’s treasures be
this hour restored,And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.The ties of faith, the
sworn alliance, broke,Our impious battles the just gods provoke.As this advice
ye practise, or reject,So hope success, or dread the dire effect.”The senior
spoke and sate. To whom repliedThe graceful husband of the Spartan bride:“Cold
counsels, Trojan, may become thy yearsBut sound ungrateful in a warrior’s
ears:Old man, if void of fallacy or art,Thy words express the purpose of thy
heart,Thou, in thy time, more sound advice hast given;But wisdom has its date,
assign’d by heaven.Then hear me, princes of the Trojan name!Their treasures I’ll
restore, but not the dame;My treasures too, for peace, I will resign;But be this
bright possession ever mine.”’Twas then, the growing discord to compose,Slow
from his seat the reverend Priam rose:His godlike aspect deep attention drew:He
paused, and these pacific words ensue:“Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliar
bands!Now take refreshment as the hour demands;Guard well the walls, relieve the
watch of night.Till the new sun restores the cheerful light.Then shall our
herald, to the Atrides sent,Before their ships proclaim my son’s intent.Next let
a truce be ask’d, that Troy may burnHer slaughter’d heroes, and their bones
inurn;That done, once more the fate of war be tried,And whose the conquest,
mighty Jove decide!”The monarch spoke: the warriors snatch’d with haste(Each at
his post in arms) a short repast.Soon as the rosy morn had waked the day,To the
black ships Idæus bent his way;There, to the sons of Mars, in council found,He
raised his voice: the host stood listening round.“Ye sons of Atreus, and ye
Greeks, give ear!The words of Troy, and Troy’s great monarch, hear.Pleased may
ye hear (so heaven succeed my prayers)What Paris, author of the war,
declares.The spoils and treasures he to Ilion bore(Oh had he perish’d ere they
touch’d our shore!)He proffers injured Greece: with large increaseOf added
Trojan wealth to buy the peace.But to restore the beauteous bride again,This
Greece demands, and Troy requests in vain.Next, O ye chiefs! we ask a truce to
burnOur slaughter’d heroes, and their bones inurn.That done, once more the fate
of war be tried,And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!”The Greeks gave ear,
but none the silence broke;At length Tydides rose, and rising spoke:“Oh, take
not, friends! defrauded of your fame,Their proffer’d wealth, nor even the
Spartan dame.Let conquest make them ours: fate shakes their wall,And Troy
already totters to her fall.”The admiring chiefs, and all the Grecian name,With
general shouts return’d him loud acclaim.Then thus the king of kings rejects the
peace:“Herald! in him thou hear’st the voice of GreeceFor what remains; let
funeral flames be fedWith heroes’ corps: I war not with the dead:Go search your
slaughtered chiefs on yonder plain,And gratify the manes of the slain.Be
witness, Jove, whose thunder rolls on high!”He said, and rear’d his sceptre to
the sky.To sacred Troy, where all her princes layTo wait the event, the herald
bent his way.He came, and standing in the midst, explain’dThe peace rejected,
but the truce obtain’d.Straight to their several cares the Trojans move,Some
search the plains, some fell the sounding grove:Nor less the Greeks, descending
on the shore,Hew’d the green forests, and the bodies bore.And now from forth the
chambers of the main,To shed his sacred light on earth again,Arose the golden
chariot of the day,And tipp’d the mountains with a purple ray.In mingled throngs
the Greek and Trojan trainThrough heaps of carnage search’d the mournful
plain.Scarce could the friend his slaughter’d friend explore,With dust
dishonour’d, and deformed with gore.The wounds they wash’d, their pious tears
they shed,And, laid along their cars, deplored the dead.Sage Priam check’d their
grief: with silent hasteThe bodies decent on the piles were placed:With melting
hearts the cold remains they burn’d,And, sadly slow, to sacred Troy return’d.Nor
less the Greeks their pious sorrows shed,And decent on the pile dispose the
dead;The cold remains consume with equal care;And slowly, sadly, to their fleet
repair.Now, ere the morn had streak’d with reddening lightThe doubtful confines
of the day and night,About the dying flames the Greeks appear’d,And round the
pile a general tomb they rear’d.Then, to secure the camp and naval powers,They
raised embattled walls with lofty towers:[186]From space to space were ample
gates around,For passing chariots, and a trench profoundOf large extent; and
deep in earth below,Strong piles infix’d stood adverse to the foe.So toil’d the
Greeks: meanwhile the gods above,In shining circle round their father
Jove,Amazed beheld the wondrous works of man:Then he, whose trident shakes the
earth, began:“What mortals henceforth shall our power adore,Our fanes frequent,
our oracles implore,If the proud Grecians thus successful boastTheir rising
bulwarks on the sea-beat coast?See the long walls extending to the main,No god
consulted, and no victim slain!Their fame shall fill the world’s remotest
ends,Wide as the morn her golden beam extends;While old Laomedon’s divine
abodes,Those radiant structures raised by labouring gods,Shall, razed and lost,
in long oblivion sleep.”Thus spoke the hoary monarch of the deep.The almighty
Thunderer with a frown replies,That clouds the world, and blackens half the
skies:“Strong god of ocean! thou, whose rage can makeThe solid earth’s eternal
basis shake!What cause of fear from mortal works could move[187]The meanest
subject of our realms above?Where’er the sun’s refulgent rays are cast,Thy power
is honour’d, and thy fame shall last.But yon proud work no future age shall
view,No trace remain where once the glory grew.The sapp’d foundations by thy
force shall fall,And, whelm’d beneath the waves, drop the huge wall:Vast drifts
of sand shall change the former shore:The ruin vanish’d, and the name no
more.”Thus they in heaven: while, o’er the Grecian train,The rolling sun
descending to the mainBeheld the finish’d work. Their bulls they slew;Back from
the tents the savoury vapour flew.And now the fleet, arrived from Lemnos’
strands,With Bacchus’ blessings cheered the generous bands.Of fragrant wines the
rich Eunaeus sentA thousant measures to the royal tent.(Eunaeus, whom Hypsipyle
of yoreTo Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,)The rest they purchased at their
proper cost,And well the plenteous freight supplied the host:Each, in exchange,
proportion’d treasures gave;[188]Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave.All
night they feast, the Greek and Trojan powers:Those on the fields, and these
within their towers.But Jove averse the signs of wrath display’d,And shot red
lightnings through the gloomy shade:Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on
all,While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall.Each pour’d to Jove before the
bowl was crown’d;And large libations drench’d the thirsty ground:Then late,
refresh’d with sleep from toils of fight,Enjoy’d the balmy blessings of the
night.[Illustration: ] GREEK AMPHORA—WINE VESSELSBOOK VIII.ARGUMENT.THE SECOND
BATTLE, AND THE DISTRESS OF THE GREEKS.Jupiter assembles a council of the
deities, and threatens them with thepains of Tartarus if they assist either
side: Minerva only obtains ofhim that she may direct the Greeks by her counsels.
The armies joinbattle: Jupiter on Mount Ida weighs in his balances the fates of
both,and affrights the Greeks with his thunders and lightnings. Nestor
alonecontinues in the field in great danger: Diomed relieves him; whoseexploits,
and those of Hector, are excellently described. Junoendeavours to animate
Neptune to the assistance of the Greeks, but invain. The acts of Teucer, who is
at length wounded by Hector, andcarried off. Juno and Minerva prepare to aid the
Grecians, but arerestrained by Iris, sent from Jupiter. The night puts an end to
thebattle. Hector continues in the field, (the Greeks being driven totheir
fortifications before the ships,) and gives orders to keep thewatch all night in
the camp, to prevent the enemy from re-embarking andescaping by flight. They
kindle fires through all the fields, and passthe night under arms. The time of
seven and twenty days is employed from the opening of the poem to the end of
this book. The scene here (except of the celestial machines) lies in the field
towards the seashore.Aurora now, fair daughter of the dawn,Sprinkled with rosy
light the dewy lawn;When Jove convened the senate of the skies,Where high
Olympus’ cloudy tops arise,The sire of gods his awful silence broke;The heavens
attentive trembled as he spoke:[189]“Celestial states! immortal gods! give
ear,Hear our decree, and reverence what ye hear;The fix’d decree which not all
heaven can move;Thou, fate! fulfil it! and, ye powers, approve!What god but
enters yon forbidden field,Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield,Back to
the skies with shame he shall be driven,Gash’d with dishonest wounds, the scorn
of heaven;Or far, oh far, from steep Olympus thrown,Low in the dark Tartarean
gulf shall groan,With burning chains fix’d to the brazen floors,And lock’d by
hell’s inexorable doors;As deep beneath the infernal centre hurl’d,[190]As from
that centre to the ethereal world.Let him who tempts me, dread those dire
abodes:And know, the Almighty is the god of gods.League all your forces, then,
ye powers above,Join all, and try the omnipotence of Jove.Let down our golden
everlasting chain[191]Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and
mainStrive all, of mortal and immortal birth,To drag, by this, the Thunderer
down to earth:Ye strive in vain! if I but stretch this hand,I heave the gods,
the ocean, and the land;I fix the chain to great Olympus’ height,And the vast
world hangs trembling in my sight!For such I reign, unbounded and above;And such
are men, and gods, compared to Jove.”The all-mighty spoke, nor durst the powers
reply:A reverend horror silenced all the sky;Trembling they stood before their
sovereign’s look;At length his best-beloved, the power of wisdom, spoke:“O first
and greatest! God, by gods adoredWe own thy might, our father and our lord!But,
ah! permit to pity human state:If not to help, at least lament their fate.From
fields forbidden we submiss refrain,With arms unaiding mourn our Argives
slain;Yet grant my counsels still their breasts may move,Or all must perish in
the wrath of Jove.”The cloud-compelling god her suit approved,And smiled
superior on his best beloved;Then call’d his coursers, and his chariot took;The
stedfast firmament beneath them shook:Rapt by the ethereal steeds the chariot
roll’d;Brass were their hoofs, their curling manes of gold:Of heaven’s undrossy
gold the gods array,Refulgent, flash’d intolerable day.High on the throne he
shines: his coursers flyBetween the extended earth and starry sky.But when to
Ida’s topmost height he came,(Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game,)Where
o’er her pointed summits proudly raised,His fane breathed odours, and his altar
blazed:There, from his radiant car, the sacred sireOf gods and men released the
steeds of fire:Blue ambient mists the immortal steeds embraced;High on the
cloudy point his seat he placed;Thence his broad eye the subject world
surveys,The town, and tents, and navigable seas.Now had the Grecians snatch’d a
short repast,And buckled on their shining arms with haste.Troy roused as soon;
for on this dreadful dayThe fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay.The gates
unfolding pour forth all their train;Squadrons on squadrons cloud the dusky
plain:Men, steeds, and chariots shake the trembling ground,The tumult thickens,
and the skies resound;And now with shouts the shocking armies closed,To lances
lances, shields to shields opposed,Host against host with shadowy legends
drew,The sounding darts in iron tempests flew;Victors and vanquish’d join
promiscuous cries,Triumphant shouts and dying groans arise;With streaming blood
the slippery fields are dyed,And slaughter’d heroes swell the dreadful tide.Long
as the morning beams, increasing bright,O’er heaven’s clear azure spread the
sacred light,Commutual death the fate of war confounds,Each adverse battle gored
with equal wounds.But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,The sire of gods
his golden scales suspends,[192]With equal hand: in these explored the fateOf
Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight:Press’d with its load, the Grecian
balance liesLow sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies.Then Jove from Ida’s
top his horrors spreads;The clouds burst dreadful o’er the Grecian heads;Thick
lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls;Their strength he withers, and
unmans their souls.Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire;The gods in
terrors, and the skies on fire.Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear,Nor
each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war:Nor he, the king of war, the alarm
sustain’dNestor alone, amidst the storm remain’d.Unwilling he remain’d, for
Paris’ dartHad pierced his courser in a mortal part;Fix’d in the forehead, where
the springing maneCurl’d o’er the brow, it stung him to the brain;Mad with his
anguish, he begins to rear,Paw with his hoofs aloft, and lash the air.Scarce had
his falchion cut the reins, and freedThe encumber’d chariot from the dying
steed,When dreadful Hector, thundering through the war,Pour’d to the tumult on
his whirling car.That day had stretch’d beneath his matchless handThe hoary
monarch of the Pylian band,But Diomed beheld; from forth the crowdHe rush’d, and
on Ulysses call’d aloud:“Whither, oh whither does Ulysses run?Oh, flight
unworthy great Laertes’ son!Mix’d with the vulgar shall thy fate be
found,Pierced in the back, a vile, dishonest wound?Oh turn and save from
Hector’s direful rageThe glory of the Greeks, the Pylian sage.”His fruitless
words are lost unheard in air,Ulysses seeks the ships, and shelters there.But
bold Tydides to the rescue goes,A single warrior midst a host of foes;Before the
coursers with a sudden springHe leap’d, and anxious thus bespoke the king:“Great
perils, father! wait the unequal fight;These younger champions will oppress thy
might.Thy veins no more with ancient vigour glow,Weak is thy servant, and thy
coursers slow.Then haste, ascend my seat, and from the carObserve the steeds of
Tros, renown’d in war.Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,To dare the
fight, or urge the rapid race:These late obey’d Æneas’ guiding rein;Leave thou
thy chariot to our faithful train;With these against yon Trojans will we go,Nor
shall great Hector want an equal foe;Fierce as he is, even he may learn to
fearThe thirsty fury of my flying spear.”Thus said the chief; and Nestor,
skill’d in war,Approves his counsel, and ascends the car:The steeds he left,
their trusty servants hold;Eurymedon, and Sthenelus the bold:The reverend
charioteer directs the course,And strains his aged arm to lash the horse.Hector
they face; unknowing how to fear,Fierce he drove on; Tydides whirl’d his
spear.The spear with erring haste mistook its way,But plunged in Eniopeus’ bosom
lay.His opening hand in death forsakes the rein;The steeds fly back: he falls,
and spurns the plain.Great Hector sorrows for his servant kill’d,Yet unrevenged
permits to press the field;Till, to supply his place and rule the car,Rose
Archeptolemus, the fierce in war.And now had death and horror cover’d
all;[193]Like timorous flocks the Trojans in their wallInclosed had bled: but
Jove with awful soundRoll’d the big thunder o’er the vast profound:Full in
Tydides’ face the lightning flew;The ground before him flamed with sulphur
blue;The quivering steeds fell prostrate at the sight;And Nestor’s trembling
hand confess’d his fright:He dropp’d the reins: and, shook with sacred
dread,Thus, turning, warn’d the intrepid Diomed:“O chief! too daring in thy
friend’s defenceRetire advised, and urge the chariot hence.This day, averse, the
sovereign of the skiesAssists great Hector, and our palm denies.Some other sun
may see the happier hour,When Greece shall conquer by his heavenly power.’Tis
not in man his fix’d decree to move:The great will glory to submit to Jove.”“O
reverend prince! (Tydides thus replies)Thy years are awful, and thy words are
wise.But ah, what grief! should haughty Hector boastI fled inglorious to the
guarded coast.Before that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,O’erwhelm me, earth;
and hide a warrior’s shame!”To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:[194]“Gods! can
thy courage fear the Phrygian’s pride?Hector may vaunt, but who shall heed the
boast?Not those who felt thy arm, the Dardan host,Nor Troy, yet bleeding in her
heroes lost;Not even a Phrygian dame, who dreads the swordThat laid in dust her
loved, lamented lord.”He said, and, hasty, o’er the gasping throngDrives the
swift steeds: the chariot smokes along;The shouts of Trojans thicken in the
wind;The storm of hissing javelins pours behind.Then with a voice that shakes
the solid skies,Pleased, Hector braves the warrior as he flies.“Go, mighty hero!
graced above the restIn seats of council and the sumptuous feast:Now hope no
more those honours from thy train;Go less than woman, in the form of man!To
scale our walls, to wrap our towers in flames,To lead in exile the fair Phrygian
dames,Thy once proud hopes, presumptuous prince! are fled;This arm shall reach
thy heart, and stretch thee dead.”Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes
invite.To stop his coursers, and to stand the fight;Thrice turn’d the chief, and
thrice imperial JoveOn Ida’s summits thunder’d from above.Great Hector heard; he
saw the flashing light,(The sign of conquest,) and thus urged the fight:“Hear,
every Trojan, Lycian, Dardan band,All famed in war, and dreadful hand to hand.Be
mindful of the wreaths your arms have won,Your great forefathers’ glories, and
your own.Heard ye the voice of Jove? Success and fameAwait on Troy, on Greece
eternal shame.In vain they skulk behind their boasted wall,Weak bulwarks;
destined by this arm to fall.High o’er their slighted trench our steeds shall
bound,And pass victorious o’er the levell’d mound.Soon as before yon hollow
ships we stand,Fight each with flames, and toss the blazing brand;Till, their
proud navy wrapt in smoke and fires,All Greece, encompass’d, in one blaze
expires.”Furious he said; then bending o’er the yoke,Encouraged his proud
steeds, while thus he spoke:“Now, Xanthus, Æthon, Lampus, urge the chase,And
thou, Podargus! prove thy generous race;Be fleet, be fearless, this important
day,And all your master’s well-spent care repay.For this, high-fed, in plenteous
stalls ye stand,Served with pure wheat, and by a princess’ hand;For this my
spouse, of great Aëtion’s line,So oft has steep’d the strengthening grain in
wine.Now swift pursue, now thunder uncontroll’d:Give me to seize rich Nestor’s
shield of gold;From Tydeus’ shoulders strip the costly load,Vulcanian arms, the
labour of a god:These if we gain, then victory, ye powers!This night, this
glorious night, the fleet is ours!”That heard, deep anguish stung Saturnia’s
soul;She shook her throne, that shook the starry pole:And thus to Neptune:
“Thou, whose force can makeThe stedfast earth from her foundations shake,Seest
thou the Greeks by fates unjust oppress’d,Nor swells thy heart in that immortal
breast?Yet Ægae, Helicè, thy power obey,[195]And gifts unceasing on thine altars
lay.Would all the deities of Greece combine,In vain the gloomy Thunderer might
repine:Sole should he sit, with scarce a god to friend,And see his Trojans to
the shades descend:Such be the scene from his Idaean bower;Ungrateful prospect
to the sullen power!”Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design:“What rage, what
madness, furious queen! is thine?I war not with the highest. All aboveSubmit and
tremble at the hand of Jove.”Now godlike Hector, to whose matchless mightJove
gave the glory of the destined fight,Squadrons on squadrons drives, and fills
the fieldsWith close-ranged chariots, and with thicken’d shields.Where the deep
trench in length extended lay,Compacted troops stand wedged in firm array,A
dreadful front! they shake the brands, and threatWith long-destroying flames the
hostile fleet.The king of men, by Juno’s self inspired,Toil’d through the tents,
and all his army fired.Swift as he moved, he lifted in his handHis purple robe,
bright ensign of command.High on the midmost bark the king appear’d:There, from
Ulysses’ deck, his voice was heard:To Ajax and Achilles reach’d the sound,Whose
distant ships the guarded navy bound.“O Argives! shame of human race! (he
cried:The hollow vessels to his voice replied,)Where now are all your glorious
boasts of yore,Your hasty triumphs on the Lemnian shore?Each fearless hero dares
a hundred foes,While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows;But who to meet
one martial man is found,When the fight rages, and the flames surround?O mighty
Jove! O sire of the distress’d!Was ever king like me, like me oppress’d?With
power immense, with justice arm’d in vain;My glory ravish’d, and my people
slain!To thee my vows were breathed from every shore;What altar smoked not with
our victims’ gore?With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame,And ask’d
destruction to the Trojan name.Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand;Give
these at least to ’scape from Hector’s hand,And save the relics of the Grecian
land!”Thus pray’d the king, and heaven’s great father heardHis vows, in
bitterness of soul preferr’d:The wrath appeased, by happy signs declares,And
gives the people to their monarch’s prayers.His eagle, sacred bird of heaven! he
sent,A fawn his talons truss’d, (divine portent!)High o’er the wondering hosts
he soar’d above,Who paid their vows to Panomphaean Jove;Then let the prey before
his altar fall;The Greeks beheld, and transport seized on all:Encouraged by the
sign, the troops revive,And fierce on Troy with doubled fury drive.Tydides
first, of all the Grecian force,O’er the broad ditch impell’d his foaming
horse,Pierced the deep ranks, their strongest battle tore,And dyed his javelin
red with Trojan gore.Young Agelaus (Phradmon was his sire)With flying coursers
shunn’d his dreadful ire;Struck through the back, the Phrygian fell
oppress’d;The dart drove on, and issued at his breast:Headlong he quits the car:
his arms resound;His ponderous buckler thunders on the ground.Forth rush a tide
of Greeks, the passage freed;The Atridae first, the Ajaces next
succeed:Meriones, like Mars in arms renown’d,And godlike Idomen, now passed the
mound;Evaemon’s son next issues to the foe,And last young Teucer with his bended
bow.Secure behind the Telamonian shieldThe skilful archer wide survey’d the
field,With every shaft some hostile victim slew,Then close beneath the sevenfold
orb withdrew:The conscious infant so, when fear alarms,Retires for safety to the
mother’s arms.Thus Ajax guards his brother in the field,Moves as he moves, and
turns the shining shield.Who first by Teucer’s mortal arrows bled?Orsilochus;
then fell Ormenus dead:The godlike Lycophon next press’d the plain,With
Chromius, Daetor, Ophelestes slain:Bold Hamopaon breathless sunk to ground;The
bloody pile great Melanippus crown’d.Heaps fell on heaps, sad trophies of his
art,A Trojan ghost attending every dart.Great Agamemnon views with joyful eyeThe
ranks grow thinner as his arrows fly:“O youth forever dear! (the monarch
cried)Thus, always thus, thy early worth be tried;Thy brave example shall
retrieve our host,Thy country’s saviour, and thy father’s boast!Sprung from an
alien’s bed thy sire to grace,The vigorous offspring of a stolen embrace:Proud
of his boy, he own’d the generous flame,And the brave son repays his cares with
fame.Now hear a monarch’s vow: If heaven’s high powersGive me to raze Troy’s
long-defended towers;Whatever treasures Greece for me design,The next rich
honorary gift be thine:Some golden tripod, or distinguished car,With coursers
dreadful in the ranks of war:Or some fair captive, whom thy eyes approve,Shall
recompense the warrior’s toils with love.”To this the chief: “With praise the
rest inspire,Nor urge a soul already fill’d with fire.What strength I have, be
now in battle tried,Till every shaft in Phrygian blood be dyed.Since rallying
from our wall we forced the foe,Still aim’d at Hector have I bent my bow:Eight
forky arrows from this hand have fled,And eight bold heroes by their points lie
dead:But sure some god denies me to destroyThis fury of the field, this dog of
Troy.”He said, and twang’d the string. The weapon fliesAt Hector’s breast, and
sings along the skies:He miss’d the mark; but pierced Gorgythio’s heart,And
drench’d in royal blood the thirsty dart.(Fair Castianira, nymph of form
divine,This offspring added to king Priam’s line.)As full-blown poppies,
overcharged with rain,[196]Decline the head, and drooping kiss the plain;So
sinks the youth: his beauteous head, depress’dBeneath his helmet, drops upon his
breast.Another shaft the raging archer drew,That other shaft with erring fury
flew,(From Hector, Phœbus turn’d the flying wound,)Yet fell not dry or guiltless
to the ground:Thy breast, brave Archeptolemus! it tore,And dipp’d its feathers
in no vulgar gore.Headlong he falls: his sudden fall alarmsThe steeds, that
startle at his sounding arms.Hector with grief his charioteer beheldAll pale and
breathless on the sanguine field:Then bids Cebriones direct the rein,Quits his
bright car, and issues on the plain.Dreadful he shouts: from earth a stone he
took,And rush’d on Teucer with the lifted rock.The youth already strain’d the
forceful yew;The shaft already to his shoulder drew;The feather in his hand,
just wing’d for flight,Touch’d where the neck and hollow chest unite;There,
where the juncture knits the channel bone,The furious chief discharged the
craggy stone:The bow-string burst beneath the ponderous blow,And his numb’d hand
dismiss’d his useless bow.He fell: but Ajax his broad shield display’d,And
screen’d his brother with the mighty shade;Till great Alaster, and Mecistheus,
boreThe batter’d archer groaning to the shore.Troy yet found grace before the
Olympian sire,He arm’d their hands, and fill’d their breasts with fire.The
Greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall,Or in the trench on heaps confusedly
fall.First of the foe, great Hector march’d along,With terror clothed, and more
than mortal strong.As the bold hound, that gives the lion chase,With beating
bosom, and with eager pace,Hangs on his haunch, or fastens on his heels,Guards
as he turns, and circles as he wheels;Thus oft the Grecians turn’d, but still
they flew;Thus following, Hector still the hindmost slew.When flying they had
pass’d the trench profound,And many a chief lay gasping on the ground;Before the
ships a desperate stand they made,And fired the troops, and called the gods to
aid.Fierce on his rattling chariot Hector came:His eyes like Gorgon shot a
sanguine flameThat wither’d all their host: like Mars he stood:Dire as the
monster, dreadful as the god!Their strong distress the wife of Jove
survey’d;Then pensive thus, to war’s triumphant maid:“O daughter of that god,
whose arm can wieldThe avenging bolt, and shake the sable shield!Now, in this
moment of her last despair,Shall wretched Greece no more confess our
care,Condemn’d to suffer the full force of fate,And drain the dregs of heaven’s
relentless hate?Gods! shall one raging hand thus level all?What numbers fell!
what numbers yet shall fall!What power divine shall Hector’s wrath assuage?Still
swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!”So spake the imperial regent of
the skies;To whom the goddess with the azure eyes:“Long since had Hector stain’d
these fields with gore,Stretch’d by some Argive on his native shore:But he
above, the sire of heaven, withstands,Mocks our attempts, and slights our just
demands;The stubborn god, inflexible and hard,Forgets my service and deserved
reward:Saved I, for this, his favourite son distress’d,By stern Eurystheus with
long labours press’d?He begg’d, with tears he begg’d, in deep dismay;I shot from
heaven, and gave his arm the day.Oh had my wisdom known this dire event,When to
grim Pluto’s gloomy gates he went;The triple dog had never felt his chain,Nor
Styx been cross’d, nor hell explored in vain.Averse to me of all his heaven of
gods,At Thetis’ suit the partial Thunderer nods;To grace her gloomy, fierce,
resenting son,My hopes are frustrate, and my Greeks undone.Some future day,
perhaps, he may be movedTo call his blue-eyed maid his best beloved.Haste,
launch thy chariot, through yon ranks to ride;Myself will arm, and thunder at
thy side.Then, goddess! say, shall Hector glory then?(That terror of the Greeks,
that man of men)When Juno’s self, and Pallas shall appear,All dreadful in the
crimson walks of war!What mighty Trojan then, on yonder shore,Expiring, pale,
and terrible no more,Shall feast the fowls, and glut the dogs with gore?”She
ceased, and Juno rein’d the steeds with care:(Heaven’s awful empress, Saturn’s
other heir:)Pallas, meanwhile, her various veil unbound,With flowers adorn’d,
with art immortal crown’d;The radiant robe her sacred fingers woveFloats in rich
waves, and spreads the court of Jove.Her father’s arms her mighty limbs
invest,His cuirass blazes on her ample breast.The vigorous power the trembling
car ascends:Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends:Huge, ponderous, strong!
that when her fury burnsProud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts
o’erturns.Saturnia lends the lash; the coursers fly;Smooth glides the chariot
through the liquid sky.Heaven’s gates spontaneous open to the powers,Heaven’s
golden gates, kept by the winged Hours.Commission’d in alternate watch they
stand,The sun’s bright portals and the skies command;Close, or unfold, the
eternal gates of dayBar heaven with clouds, or roll those clouds away.The
sounding hinges ring, the clouds divide.Prone down the steep of heaven their
course they guide.But Jove, incensed, from Ida’s top survey’d,And thus enjoin’d
the many-colour’d maid.[Illustration: ] JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE
GREEKS“Thaumantia! mount the winds, and stop their car;Against the highest who
shall wage the war?If furious yet they dare the vain debate,Thus have I spoke,
and what I speak is fate:Their coursers crush’d beneath the wheels shall
lie,Their car in fragments, scatter’d o’er the sky:My lightning these rebellious
shall confound,And hurl them flaming, headlong, to the ground,Condemn’d for ten
revolving years to weepThe wounds impress’d by burning thunder deep.So shall
Minerva learn to fear our ire,Nor dare to combat hers and nature’s sire.For
Juno, headstrong and imperious still,She claims some title to transgress our
will.”Swift as the wind, the various-colour’d maidFrom Ida’s top her golden
wings display’d;To great Olympus’ shining gate she flies,There meets the chariot
rushing down the skies,Restrains their progress from the bright abodes,And
speaks the mandate of the sire of gods.“What frenzy goddesses! what rage can
moveCelestial minds to tempt the wrath of Jove?Desist, obedient to his high
command:This is his word; and know his word shall stand:His lightning your
rebellion shall confound,And hurl ye headlong, flaming, to the ground;Your
horses crush’d beneath the wheels shall lie,Your car in fragments scatter’d o’er
the sky;Yourselves condemn’d ten rolling years to weepThe wounds impress’d by
burning thunder deep.So shall Minerva learn to fear his ire,Nor dare to combat
hers and nature’s sire.For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,She claims some
title to transgress his will:But thee, what desperate insolence has drivenTo
lift thy lance against the king of heaven?”Then, mounting on the pinions of the
wind,She flew; and Juno thus her rage resign’d:“O daughter of that god, whose
arm can wieldThe avenging bolt, and shake the saber shield!No more let beings of
superior birthContend with Jove for this low race of earth;Triumphant now, now
miserably slain,They breathe or perish as the fates ordain:But Jove’s high
counsels full effect shall find;And, ever constant, ever rule mankind.”She
spoke, and backward turn’d her steeds of light,Adorn’d with manes of gold, and
heavenly bright.The Hours unloosed them, panting as they stood,And heap’d their
mangers with ambrosial food.There tied, they rest in high celestial stalls;The
chariot propp’d against the crystal walls,The pensive goddesses, abash’d,
controll’d,Mix with the gods, and fill their seats of gold.[Illustration: ] THE
HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO’S CARAnd now the Thunderer meditates his
flightFrom Ida’s summits to the Olympian height.Swifter than thought, the wheels
instinctive fly,Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky.’Twas Neptune’s
charge his coursers to unbrace,And fix the car on its immortal base;There stood
the chariot, beaming forth its rays,Till with a snowy veil he screen’d the
blaze.He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold,The eternal Thunderer sat,
enthroned in gold.High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes,And wide
beneath him all Olympus shakes.Trembling afar the offending powers
appear’d,Confused and silent, for his frown they fear’d.He saw their soul, and
thus his word imparts:“Pallas and Juno! say, why heave your hearts?Soon was your
battle o’er: proud Troy retiredBefore your face, and in your wrath expired.But
know, whoe’er almighty power withstand!Unmatch’d our force, unconquer’d is our
hand:Who shall the sovereign of the skies control?Not all the gods that crown
the starry pole.Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take,And each immortal
nerve with horror shake.For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand;What
power soe’er provokes our lifted hand,On this our hill no more shall hold his
place;Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race.”Juno and Pallas grieving hear
the doom,But feast their souls on Ilion’s woes to come.Though secret anger
swell’d Minerva’s breast,The prudent goddess yet her wrath repress’d;But Juno,
impotent of rage, replies:“What hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies!Strength
and omnipotence invest thy throne;’Tis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone.For
Greece we grieve, abandon’d by her fateTo drink the dregs of thy unmeasured
hate.From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,With arms unaiding see our Argives
slain;Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move,Lest all should perish
in the rage of Jove.”The goddess thus; and thus the god replies,Who swells the
clouds, and blackens all the skies:“The morning sun, awaked by loud alarms,Shall
see the almighty Thunderer in arms.What heaps of Argives then shall load the
plain,Those radiant eyes shall view, and view in vain.Nor shall great Hector
cease the rage of fight,The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight,Even till the
day when certain fates ordainThat stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain)Shall rise
in vengeance, and lay waste the plain.For such is fate, nor canst thou turn its
courseWith all thy rage, with all thy rebel force.Fly, if thy wilt, to earth’s
remotest bound,Where on her utmost verge the seas resound;Where cursed Iapetus
and Saturn dwell,Fast by the brink, within the streams of hell;No sun e’er gilds
the gloomy horrors there;No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air:There arm once
more the bold Titanian band;And arm in vain; for what I will, shall stand.”Now
deep in ocean sunk the lamp of light,And drew behind the cloudy veil of
night:The conquering Trojans mourn his beams decay’d;The Greeks rejoicing bless
the friendly shade.The victors keep the field; and Hector callsA martial council
near the navy walls;These to Scamander’s bank apart he led,Where thinly
scatter’d lay the heaps of dead.The assembled chiefs, descending on the
ground,Attend his order, and their prince surround.A massy spear he bore of
mighty strength,Of full ten cubits was the lance’s length;The point was brass,
refulgent to behold,Fix’d to the wood with circling rings of gold:The noble
Hector on his lance reclined,And, bending forward, thus reveal’d his mind:“Ye
valiant Trojans, with attention hear!Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give
ear!This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flameGreece with her ships, and
crown our toils with fame.But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls,And
guards them trembling in their wooden walls.Obey the night, and use her peaceful
hoursOur steeds to forage, and refresh our powers.Straight from the town be
sheep and oxen sought,And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought.Wide
o’er the field, high blazing to the sky,Let numerous fires the absent sun
supply,The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise,Till the bright morn her
purple beam displays;Lest, in the silence and the shades of night,Greece on her
sable ships attempt her flight.Not unmolested let the wretches gainTheir lofty
decks, or safely cleave the main;Some hostile wound let every dart bestow,Some
lasting token of the Phrygian foe,Wounds, that long hence may ask their spouses’
care.And warn their children from a Trojan war.Now through the circuit of our
Ilion wall,Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call;To bid the sires with hoary
honours crown’d,And beardless youths, our battlements surround.Firm be the
guard, while distant lie our powers,And let the matrons hang with lights the
towers;Lest, under covert of the midnight shade,The insidious foe the naked town
invade.Suffice, to-night, these orders to obey;A nobler charge shall rouse the
dawning day.The gods, I trust, shall give to Hector’s handFrom these detested
foes to free the land,Who plough’d, with fates averse, the watery way:For Trojan
vultures a predestined prey.Our common safety must be now the care;But soon as
morning paints the fields of air,Sheathed in bright arms let every troop
engage,And the fired fleet behold the battle rage.Then, then shall Hector and
Tydides proveWhose fates are heaviest in the scales of Jove.To-morrow’s light (O
haste the glorious morn!)Shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne,With this
keen javelin shall his breast be gored,And prostrate heroes bleed around their
lord.Certain as this, oh! might my days endure,From age inglorious, and black
death secure;So might my life and glory know no bound,Like Pallas worshipp’d,
like the sun renown’d!As the next dawn, the last they shall enjoy,Shall crush
the Greeks, and end the woes of Troy.”The leader spoke. From all his host
aroundShouts of applause along the shores resound.Each from the yoke the smoking
steeds untied,And fix’d their headstalls to his chariot-side.Fat sheep and oxen
from the town are led,With generous wine, and all-sustaining bread,Full
hecatombs lay burning on the shore:The winds to heaven the curling vapours
bore.Ungrateful offering to the immortal powers![197]Whose wrath hung heavy o’er
the Trojan towers:Nor Priam nor his sons obtain’d their grace;Proud Troy they
hated, and her guilty race.The troops exulting sat in order round,And beaming
fires illumined all the ground.As when the moon, refulgent lamp of
night,[198]O’er heaven’s pure azure spreads her sacred light,When not a breath
disturbs the deep serene,And not a cloud o’ercasts the solemn scene,Around her
throne the vivid planets roll,And stars unnumber’d gild the glowing pole,O’er
the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,And tip with silver every mountain’s
head:Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise,A flood of glory bursts
from all the skies:The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight,Eye the blue
vault, and bless the useful light.So many flames before proud Ilion blaze,And
lighten glimmering Xanthus with their rays.The long reflections of the distant
firesGleam on the walls, and tremble on the spires.A thousand piles the dusky
horrors gild,And shoot a shady lustre o’er the field.Full fifty guards each
flaming pile attend,Whose umber’d arms, by fits, thick flashes send,Loud neigh
the coursers o’er their heaps of corn,And ardent warriors wait the rising
morn.[Illustration: ] THE SHIELD OF ACHILLESBOOK IX.ARGUMENT.THE EMBASSY TO
ACHILLES.Agamemnon, after the last day’s defeat, proposes to the Greeks to
quitthe siege, and return to their country. Diomed opposes this, and
Nestorseconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution. He orders the guard tobe
strengthened, and a council summoned to deliberate what measures areto be
followed in this emergency. Agamemnon pursues this advice, andNestor further
prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles, inorder to move him to a
reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choiceof, who are accompanied by old
Phœnix. They make, each of them, verymoving and pressing speeches, but are
rejected with roughness byAchilles, who notwithstanding retains Phœnix in his
tent. Theambassadors return unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops
betakethemselves to sleep. This book, and the next following, take up the space
of one night, which is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem. The
scene lies on the sea-shore, the station of the Grecian ships.Thus joyful Troy
maintain’d the watch of night;While fear, pale comrade of inglorious
flight,[199]And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part,Sat on each face, and
sadden’d every heart.As from its cloudy dungeon issuing forth,A double tempest
of the west and northSwells o’er the sea, from Thracia’s frozen shore,Heaps
waves on waves, and bids the Ægean roar:This way and that the boiling deeps are
toss’d:Such various passions urged the troubled host,Great Agamemnon grieved
above the rest;Superior sorrows swell’d his royal breast;Himself his orders to
the heralds bears,To bid to council all the Grecian peers,But bid in whispers:
these surround their chief,In solemn sadness and majestic grief.The king amidst
the mournful circle rose:Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.So silent
fountains, from a rock’s tall head,In sable streams soft-trickling waters
shed.With more than vulgar grief he stood oppress’d;Words, mix’d with sighs,
thus bursting from his breast:“Ye sons of Greece! partake your leader’s
care;Fellows in arms and princes of the war!Of partial Jove too justly we
complain,And heavenly oracles believed in vain.A safe return was promised to our
toils,With conquest honour’d and enrich’d with spoils:Now shameful flight alone
can save the host;Our wealth, our people, and our glory lost.So Jove decrees,
almighty lord of all!Jove, at whose nod whole empires rise or fall,Who shakes
the feeble props of human trust,And towers and armies humbles to the dust.Haste
then, for ever quit these fatal fields,Haste to the joys our native country
yields;Spread all your canvas, all your oars employ,Nor hope the fall of
heaven-defended Troy.”He said: deep silence held the Grecian band;Silent,
unmov’d in dire dismay they stand;A pensive scene! till Tydeus’ warlike
sonRoll’d on the king his eyes, and thus begun:“When kings advise us to renounce
our fame,First let him speak who first has suffer’d shame.If I oppose thee,
prince! thy wrath withhold,The laws of council bid my tongue be bold.Thou first,
and thou alone, in fields of fight,Durst brand my courage, and defame my
might:Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appear’d,The Greeks stood witness,
all our army heard.The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring,The gods have
made thee but by halves a king:They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command;They
gave dominion o’er the seas and land;The noblest power that might the world
controlThey gave thee not—a brave and virtuous soul.Is this a general’s voice,
that would suggestFears like his own to every Grecian breast?Confiding in our
want of worth, he stands;And if we fly, ’tis what our king commands.Go thou,
inglorious! from the embattled plain;Ships thou hast store, and nearest to the
main;A noble care the Grecians shall employ,To combat, conquer, and extirpate
Troy.Here Greece shall stay; or, if all Greece retire,Myself shall stay, till
Troy or I expire;Myself, and Sthenelus, will fight for fame;God bade us fight,
and ’twas with God we came.”He ceased; the Greeks loud acclamations raise,And
voice to voice resounds Tydides’ praise.Wise Nestor then his reverend figure
rear’d;He spoke: the host in still attention heard:[200]“O truly great! in whom
the gods have join’dSuch strength of body with such force of mind:In conduct, as
in courage, you excel,Still first to act what you advise so well.These wholesome
counsels which thy wisdom moves,Applauding Greece with common voice
approves.Kings thou canst blame; a bold but prudent youth:And blame even kings
with praise, because with truth.And yet those years that since thy birth have
runWould hardly style thee Nestor’s youngest son.Then let me add what yet
remains behind,A thought unfinish’d in that generous mind;Age bids me speak! nor
shall the advice I bringDistaste the people, or offend the king:“Cursed is the
man, and void of law and right,Unworthy property, unworthy light,Unfit for
public rule, or private care,That wretch, that monster, who delights in
war;Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy,To tear his country, and his kind
destroy!This night, refresh and fortify thy train;Between the trench and wall
let guards remain:Be that the duty of the young and bold;But thou, O king, to
council call the old;Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares;Thy high
commands must spirit all our wars.With Thracian wines recruit thy honour’d
guests,For happy counsels flow from sober feasts.Wise, weighty counsels aid a
state distress’d,And such a monarch as can choose the best.See what a blaze from
hostile tents aspires,How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires!Who can,
unmoved, behold the dreadful light?What eye beholds them, and can close
to-night?This dreadful interval determines all;To-morrow, Troy must flame, or
Greece must fall.”Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey;Swift through the
gates the guards direct their way.His son was first to pass the lofty mound,The
generous Thrasymed, in arms renown’d:Next him, Ascalaphus, Iälmen, stood,The
double offspring of the warrior-god:Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join,And Lycomed
of Creon’s noble line.Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands,And each bold
chief a hundred spears commands.The fires they light, to short repasts they
fall,Some line the trench, and others man the wall.The king of men, on public
counsels bent,Convened the princes in his ample tent,Each seized a portion of
the kingly feast,But stay’d his hand when thirst and hunger ceased.Then Nestor
spoke, for wisdom long approved,And slowly rising, thus the council
moved.“Monarch of nations! whose superior swayAssembled states, and lords of
earth obey,The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given,And millions own the care
of thee and Heaven.O king! the counsels of my age attend;With thee my cares
begin, with thee must end.Thee, prince! it fits alike to speak and
hear,Pronounce with judgment, with regard give ear,To see no wholesome motion be
withstood,And ratify the best for public good.Nor, though a meaner give advice,
repine,But follow it, and make the wisdom thine.Hear then a thought, not now
conceived in haste,At once my present judgment and my past.When from Pelides’
tent you forced the maid,I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade;But bold
of soul, when headlong fury fired,You wronged the man, by men and gods
admired:Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end,With prayers to move him, or
with gifts to bend.”To whom the king. “With justice hast thou shownA prince’s
faults, and I with reason own.That happy man, whom Jove still honours most,Is
more than armies, and himself a host.Bless’d in his love, this wondrous hero
stands;Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands.Fain would my heart,
which err’d through frantic rage,The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage.If
gifts immense his mighty soul can bow,[201]Hear, all ye Greeks, and witness what
I vow.Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,And twice ten vases of refulgent
mould:Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frameYet knows no office, nor has
felt the flame;Twelve steeds unmatch’d in fleetness and in force,And still
victorious in the dusty course;(Rich were the man whose ample stores exceedThe
prizes purchased by their winged speed;)Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian
line,Skill’d in each art, unmatch’d in form divine,The same I chose for more
than vulgar charms,When Lesbos sank beneath the hero’s arms:All these, to buy
his friendship, shall be paid,And join’d with these the long-contested maid;With
all her charms, Briseïs I resign,And solemn swear those charms were never
mine;Untouch’d she stay’d, uninjured she removes,Pure from my arms, and
guiltless of my loves,[202]These instant shall be his; and if the powersGive to
our arms proud Ilion’s hostile towers,Then shall he store (when Greece the spoil
divides)With gold and brass his loaded navy’s sides:Besides, full twenty nymphs
of Trojan raceWith copious love shall crown his warm embrace,Such as himself
will choose; who yield to none,Or yield to Helen’s heavenly charms alone.Yet
hear me further: when our wars are o’er,If safe we land on Argos’ fruitful
shore,There shall he live my son, our honours share,And with Orestes’ self
divide my care.Yet more—three daughters in my court are bred,And each well
worthy of a royal bed;Laodice and Iphigenia fair,[203]And bright Chrysothemis
with golden hair;Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve,I ask no
presents, no reward for love:Myself will give the dower; so vast a storeAs never
father gave a child before.Seven ample cities shall confess his sway,Him Enope,
and Pheræ him obey,Cardamyle with ample turrets crown’d,And sacred Pedasus for
vines renown’d;Æpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,And rich Antheia with her
flowery fields:[204]The whole extent to Pylos’ sandy plain,Along the verdant
margin of the main.There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;Bold are the
men, and generous is the soil;There shall he reign, with power and justice
crown’d,And rule the tributary realms around.All this I give, his vengeance to
control,And sure all this may move his mighty soul.Pluto, the grisly god, who
never spares,Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers,Lives dark and
dreadful in deep hell’s abodes,And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods.Great
though he be, it fits him to obey,Since more than his my years, and more my
sway.”[Illustration: ] PLUTOThe monarch thus. The reverend Nestor then:“Great
Agamemnon! glorious king of men!Such are thy offers as a prince may take,And
such as fits a generous king to make.Let chosen delegates this hour be
sent(Myself will name them) to Pelides’ tent.Let Phœnix lead, revered for hoary
age,Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.Yet more to sanctify the word you
send,Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece
demands;Pray in deep silence,[205] and with purest hands.”[206][Illustration: ]
THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLESHe said; and all approved. The heralds bringThe cleansing
water from the living spring.The youth with wine the sacred goblets crown’d,And
large libations drench’d the sands around.The rite perform’d, the chiefs their
thirst allay,Then from the royal tent they take their way;Wise Nestor turns on
each his careful eye,Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply;Much he advised
them all, Ulysses most,To deprecate the chief, and save the host.Through the
still night they march, and hear the roarOf murmuring billows on the sounding
shore.To Neptune, ruler of the seas profound,Whose liquid arms the mighty globe
surround,They pour forth vows, their embassy to bless,And calm the rage of stern
Æacides.And now, arrived, where on the sandy bayThe Myrmidonian tents and
vessels lay;Amused at ease, the godlike man they found,Pleased with the solemn
harp’s harmonious sound.(The well wrought harp from conquered Thebae came;Of
polish’d silver was its costly frame.)With this he soothes his angry soul, and
singsThe immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.Patroclus only of the royal
train,Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain:Full opposite he sat, and
listen’d long,In silence waiting till he ceased the song.Unseen the Grecian
embassy proceedsTo his high tent; the great Ulysses leads.Achilles starting, as
the chiefs he spied,Leap’d from his seat, and laid the harp aside.With like
surprise arose Menoetius’ son:Pelides grasp’d their hands, and thus
begun:“Princes, all hail! whatever brought you here.Or strong necessity, or
urgent fear;Welcome, though Greeks! for not as foes ye came;To me more dear than
all that bear the name.”With that, the chiefs beneath his roof he led,And placed
in seats with purple carpets spread.Then thus—“Patroclus, crown a larger
bowl,Mix purer wine, and open every soul.Of all the warriors yonder host can
send,Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend.”He said: Patroclus
o’er the blazing fireHeaps in a brazen vase three chines entire:The brazen vase
Automedon sustains,Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains.Achilles at
the genial feast presides,The parts transfixes, and with skill divides.Meanwhile
Patroclus sweats, the fire to raise;The tent is brighten’d with the rising
blaze:Then, when the languid flames at length subside,He strows a bed of glowing
embers wide,Above the coals the smoking fragments turnsAnd sprinkles sacred salt
from lifted urns;With bread the glittering canisters they load,Which round the
board Menoetius’ son bestow’d;Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight,Each
portion parts, and orders every rite.The first fat offering to the immortals
due,Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw;Then each, indulging in the social
feast,His thirst and hunger soberly repress’d.That done, to Phœnix Ajax gave the
sign:Not unperceived; Ulysses crown’d with wineThe foaming bowl, and instant
thus began,His speech addressing to the godlike man.“Health to Achilles! happy
are thy guests!Not those more honour’d whom Atrides feasts:Though generous
plenty crown thy loaded boards,That, Agamemnon’s regal tent affords;But greater
cares sit heavy on our souls,Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls.What
scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!The dead we mourn, and for the living
fear;Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands,And owns no help but from
thy saving hands:Troy and her aids for ready vengeance call;Their threatening
tents already shade our wall:Hear how with shouts their conquest they
proclaim,And point at every ship their vengeful flame!For them the father of the
gods declares,Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.See, full of Jove,
avenging Hector rise!See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies;What fury in
his breast, what lightning in his eyes!He waits but for the morn, to sink in
flameThe ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian name.Heavens! how my country’s
woes distract my mind,Lest Fate accomplish all his rage design’d!And must we,
gods! our heads inglorious layIn Trojan dust, and this the fatal day?Return,
Achilles: oh return, though late,To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of
Fate;If in that heart or grief or courage lies,Rise to redeem; ah, yet to
conquer, rise!The day may come, when, all our warriors slain,That heart shall
melt, that courage rise in vain:Regard in time, O prince divinely brave!Those
wholesome counsels which thy father gave.When Peleus in his aged arms
embracedHis parting son, these accents were his last:“‘My child! with strength,
with glory, and success,Thy arms may Juno and Minerva bless!Trust that to
Heaven: but thou, thy cares engageTo calm thy passions, and subdue thy rage:From
gentler manners let thy glory grow,And shun contention, the sure source of
woe;That young and old may in thy praise combine,The virtues of humanity be
thine—’This now-despised advice thy father gave;Ah! check thy anger; and be
truly brave.If thou wilt yield to great Atrides’ prayers,Gifts worthy thee his
royal hand prepares;If not—but hear me, while I number o’erThe proffer’d
presents, an exhaustless store.Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,And twice
ten vases of refulgent mould;Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frameYet
knows no office, nor has felt the flame;Twelve steeds unmatched in fleetness and
in force,And still victorious in the dusty course;(Rich were the man, whose
ample stores exceedThe prizes purchased by their winged speed;)Seven lovely
captives of the Lesbian line,Skill’d in each art, unmatch’d in form divine,The
same he chose for more than vulgar charms,When Lesbos sank beneath thy
conquering arms.All these, to buy thy friendship shall be paid,And, join’d with
these, the long-contested maid;With all her charms, Briseïs he’ll resign,And
solemn swear those charms were only thine;Untouch’d she stay’d, uninjured she
removes,Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.These instant shall be
thine; and if the powersGive to our arms proud Ilion’s hostile towers,Then shalt
thou store (when Greece the spoil divides)With gold and brass thy loaded navy’s
sides.Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan raceWith copious love shall crown
thy warm embrace;Such as thyself shall chose; who yield to none,Or yield to
Helen’s heavenly charms alone.Yet hear me further: when our wars are o’er,If
safe we land on Argos’ fruitful shore,There shalt thou live his son, his honour
share,And with Orestes’ self divide his care.Yet more—three daughters in his
court are bred,And each well worthy of a royal bed:Laodice and Iphigenia
fair,And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair:Her shalt thou wed whom most thy
eyes approve;He asks no presents, no reward for love:Himself will give the
dower; so vast a storeAs never father gave a child before.Seven ample cities
shall confess thy sway,The Enope and Pheræ thee obey,Cardamyle with ample
turrets crown’d,And sacred Pedasus, for vines renown’d:Æpea fair, the pastures
Hira yields,And rich Antheia with her flowery fields;The whole extent to Pylos’
sandy plain,Along the verdant margin of the main.There heifers graze, and
labouring oxen toil;Bold are the men, and generous is the soil.There shalt thou
reign, with power and justice crown’d,And rule the tributary realms around.Such
are the proffers which this day we bring,Such the repentance of a suppliant
king.But if all this, relentless, thou disdain,If honour and if interest plead
in vain,Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford,And be, amongst her guardian
gods, adored.If no regard thy suffering country claim,Hear thy own glory, and
the voice of fame:For now that chief, whose unresisted ireMade nations tremble,
and whole hosts retire,Proud Hector, now, the unequal fight demands,And only
triumphs to deserve thy hands.”Then thus the goddess-born: “Ulysses, hearA
faithful speech, that knows nor art nor fear;What in my secret soul is
understood,My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good.Let Greece then know,
my purpose I retain:Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.Who dares think
one thing, and another tell,My heart detests him as the gates of hell.“Then thus
in short my fix’d resolves attend,Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend;Long
toils, long perils in their cause I bore,But now the unfruitful glories charm no
more.Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim,The wretch and hero find their
prize the same.Alike regretted in the dust he lies,Who yields ignobly, or who
bravely dies.Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,A life of labours, lo!
what fruit remains?As the bold bird her helpless young attends,From danger
guards them, and from want defends;In search of prey she wings the spacious
air,And with the untasted food supplies her care:For thankless Greece such
hardships have I braved,Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved;Long
sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood,And sweat laborious days in dust and
blood.I sack’d twelve ample cities on the main,[207]And twelve lay smoking on
the Trojan plain:Then at Atrides’ haughty feet were laidThe wealth I gathered,
and the spoils I made.Your mighty monarch these in peace possess’d;Some few my
soldiers had, himself the rest.Some present, too, to every prince was paid;And
every prince enjoys the gift he made:I only must refund, of all his train;See
what pre-eminence our merits gain!My spoil alone his greedy soul delights:My
spouse alone must bless his lustful nights:The woman, let him (as he may)
enjoy;But what’s the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy?What to these shores the
assembled nations draws,What calls for vengeance but a woman’s cause?Are fair
endowments and a beauteous faceBeloved by none but those of Atreus’ race?The
wife whom choice and passion doth approve,Sure every wise and worthy man will
love.Nor did my fair one less distinction claim;Slave as she was, my soul adored
the dame.Wrong’d in my love, all proffers I disdain;Deceived for once, I trust
not kings again.Ye have my answer—what remains to do,Your king, Ulysses, may
consult with you.What needs he the defence this arm can make?Has he not walls no
human force can shake?Has he not fenced his guarded navy roundWith piles, with
ramparts, and a trench profound?And will not these (the wonders he has
done)Repel the rage of Priam’s single son?There was a time (’twas when for
Greece I fought)When Hector’s prowess no such wonders wrought;He kept the verge
of Troy, nor dared to waitAchilles’ fury at the Scæan gate;He tried it once, and
scarce was saved by fate.But now those ancient enmities are o’er;To-morrow we
the favouring gods implore;Then shall you see our parting vessels crown’d,And
hear with oars the Hellespont resound.The third day hence shall Pythia greet our
sails,[208]If mighty Neptune send propitious gales;Pythia to her Achilles shall
restoreThe wealth he left for this detested shore:Thither the spoils of this
long war shall pass,The ruddy gold, the steel, and shining brass:My beauteous
captives thither I’ll convey,And all that rests of my unravish’d prey.One only
valued gift your tyrant gave,And that resumed—the fair Lyrnessian slave.Then
tell him: loud, that all the Greeks may hear,And learn to scorn the wretch they
basely fear;(For arm’d in impudence, mankind he braves,And meditates new cheats
on all his slaves;Though shameless as he is, to face these eyesIs what he dares
not: if he dares he dies;)Tell him, all terms, all commerce I decline,Nor share
his council, nor his battle join;For once deceiv’d, was his; but twice were
mine,No—let the stupid prince, whom Jove deprivesOf sense and justice, run where
frenzy drives;His gifts are hateful: kings of such a kindStand but as slaves
before a noble mind,Not though he proffer’d all himself possess’d,And all his
rapine could from others wrest:Not all the golden tides of wealth that crownThe
many-peopled Orchomenian town;[209]Not all proud Thebes’ unrivall’d walls
contain,The world’s great empress on the Egyptian plain(That spreads her
conquests o’er a thousand states,And pours her heroes through a hundred
gates,Two hundred horsemen and two hundred carsFrom each wide portal issuing to
the wars);[210]Though bribes were heap’d on bribes, in number moreThan dust in
fields, or sands along the shore;Should all these offers for my friendship
call,’Tis he that offers, and I scorn them all.Atrides’ daughter never shall be
led(An ill-match’d consort) to Achilles’ bed;Like golden Venus though she
charm’d the heart,And vied with Pallas in the works of art;Some greater Greek
let those high nuptials grace,I hate alliance with a tyrant’s race.If heaven
restore me to my realms with life,The reverend Peleus shall elect my
wife;Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine,And kings that sue to mix their
blood with mine.Bless’d in kind love, my years shall glide away,Content with
just hereditary sway;There, deaf for ever to the martial strife,Enjoy the dear
prerogative of life.Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold.Not all Apollo’s
Pythian treasures hold,Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway,Can bribe
the poor possession of a day!Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain,And
steeds unrivall’d on the dusty plain:But from our lips the vital spirit
fled,Returns no more to wake the silent dead.My fates long since by Thetis were
disclosed,And each alternate, life or fame, proposed;Here, if I stay, before the
Trojan town,Short is my date, but deathless my renown:If I return, I quit
immortal praiseFor years on years, and long-extended days.Convinced, though
late, I find my fond mistake,And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make;To
quit these shores, their native seats enjoy,Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended
Troy.Jove’s arm display’d asserts her from the skies!Her hearts are
strengthen’d, and her glories rise.Go then to Greece, report our fix’d
design;Bid all your counsels, all your armies join,Let all your forces, all your
arts conspire,To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire.One stratagem
has fail’d, and others will:Ye find, Achilles is unconquer’d still.Go
then—digest my message as ye may—But here this night let reverend Phœnix
stay:His tedious toils and hoary hairs demandA peaceful death in Pythia’s
friendly land.But whether he remain or sail with me,His age be sacred, and his
will be free.”[Illustration: ] GREEK GALLEYThe son of Peleus ceased: the chiefs
aroundIn silence wrapt, in consternation drown’d,Attend the stern reply. Then
Phœnix rose;(Down his white beard a stream of sorrow flows;)And while the fate
of suffering Greece he mourn’d,With accent weak these tender words
return’d.[Illustration: ] PROSERPINE“Divine Achilles! wilt thou then retire,And
leave our hosts in blood, our fleets on fire?If wrath so dreadful fill thy
ruthless mind,How shall thy friend, thy Phœnix, stay behind?The royal Peleus,
when from Pythia’s coastHe sent thee early to the Achaian host;Thy youth as then
in sage debates unskill’d,And new to perils of the direful field:He bade me
teach thee all the ways of war,To shine in councils, and in camps to dare.Never,
ah, never let me leave thy side!No time shall part us, and no fate divide,Not
though the god, that breathed my life, restoreThe bloom I boasted, and the port
I bore,When Greece of old beheld my youthful flames(Delightful Greece, the land
of lovely dames),My father faithless to my mother’s arms,Old as he was, adored a
stranger’s charms.I tried what youth could do (at her desire)To win the damsel,
and prevent my sire.My sire with curses loads my hated head,And cries, ‘Ye
furies! barren be his bed.’Infernal Jove, the vengeful fiends below,And ruthless
Proserpine, confirm’d his vow.Despair and grief distract my labouring mind!Gods!
what a crime my impious heart design’d!I thought (but some kind god that thought
suppress’d)To plunge the poniard in my father’s breast;Then meditate my flight:
my friends in vainWith prayers entreat me, and with force detain.On fat of rams,
black bulls, and brawny swine,They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant
wine;Strong guards they placed, and watch’d nine nights entire;The roofs and
porches flamed with constant fire.The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of
all:And, favour’d by the night, o’erleap’d the wall,My travels thence through
spacious Greece extend;In Phthia’s court at last my labours end.Your sire
received me, as his son caress’d,With gifts enrich’d, and with possessions
bless’d.The strong Dolopians thenceforth own’d my reign,And all the coast that
runs along the main.By love to thee his bounties I repaid,And early wisdom to
thy soul convey’d:Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave:A child I took
thee, but a hero gave.Thy infant breast a like affection show’d;Still in my arms
(an ever-pleasing load)Or at my knee, by Phœnix wouldst thou stand;No food was
grateful but from Phœnix’ hand.[211]I pass my watchings o’er thy helpless
years,The tender labours, the compliant cares,The gods (I thought) reversed
their hard decree,And Phœnix felt a father’s joys in thee:Thy growing virtues
justified my cares,And promised comfort to my silver hairs.Now be thy rage, thy
fatal rage, resign’d;A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind:The gods (the only
great, and only wise)Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice;Offending man
their high compassion wins,And daily prayers atone for daily sins.Prayers are
Jove’s daughters, of celestial race,Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their
face;With humble mien, and with dejected eyes,Constant they follow, where
injustice flies.Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined,Sweeps the wide earth,
and tramples o’er mankind,While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow
behind.Who hears these daughters of almighty Jove,For him they mediate to the
throne above:When man rejects the humble suit they make,The sire revenges for
the daughters’ sake;From Jove commission’d, fierce injustice thenDescends to
punish unrelenting men.O let not headlong passion bear the swayThese reconciling
goddesses obey:Due honours to the seed of Jove belong,Due honours calm the
fierce, and bend the strong.Were these not paid thee by the terms we bring,Were
rage still harbour’d in the haughty king;Nor Greece nor all her fortunes should
engageThy friend to plead against so just a rage.But since what honour asks the
general sends,And sends by those whom most thy heart commends;The best and
noblest of the Grecian train;Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain!Let me (my
son) an ancient fact unfold,A great example drawn from times of old;Hear what
our fathers were, and what their praise,Who conquer’d their revenge in former
days.“Where Calydon on rocky mountains stands[212]Once fought the Ætolian and
Curetian bands;To guard it those; to conquer, these advance;And mutual deaths
were dealt with mutual chance.The silver Cynthia bade contention rise,In
vengeance of neglected sacrifice;On Œneus fields she sent a monstrous boar,That
levell’d harvests, and whole forests tore:This beast (when many a chief his
tusks had slain)Great Meleager stretch’d along the plain,Then, for his spoils, a
new debate arose,The neighbour nations thence commencing foes.Strong as they
were, the bold Curetes fail’d,While Meleager’s thundering arm prevail’d:Till
rage at length inflamed his lofty breast(For rage invades the wisest and the
best).“Cursed by Althaea, to his wrath he yields,And in his wife’s embrace
forgets the fields.(She from Marpessa sprung, divinely fair,And matchless Idas,
more than man in war:The god of day adored the mother’s charms;Against the god
the father bent his arms:The afflicted pair, their sorrows to proclaim,From
Cleopatra changed their daughter’s name,And call’d Alcyone; a name to showThe
father’s grief, the mourning mother’s woe.)To her the chief retired from stern
debate,But found no peace from fierce Althaea’s hate:Althaea’s hate the unhappy
warrior drew,Whose luckless hand his royal uncle slew;She beat the ground, and
call’d the powers beneathOn her own son to wreak her brother’s death;Hell heard
her curses from the realms profound,And the red fiends that walk the nightly
round.In vain Ætolia her deliverer waits,War shakes her walls, and thunders at
her gates.She sent ambassadors, a chosen band,Priests of the gods, and elders of
the land;Besought the chief to save the sinking state:Their prayers were urgent,
and their proffers great:(Full fifty acres of the richest ground,Half pasture
green, and half with vineyards crown’d:)His suppliant father, aged Œneus,
came;His sisters follow’d; even the vengeful dame,Althaea, sues; his friends
before him fall:He stands relentless, and rejects them all.Meanwhile the
victor’s shouts ascend the skies;The walls are scaled; the rolling flames
arise;At length his wife (a form divine) appears,With piercing cries, and
supplicating tears;She paints the horrors of a conquer’d town,The heroes slain,
the palaces o’erthrown,The matrons ravish’d, the whole race enslaved:The warrior
heard, he vanquish’d, and he saved.The Ætolians, long disdain’d, now took their
turn,And left the chief their broken faith to mourn.Learn hence, betimes to curb
pernicious ire,Nor stay till yonder fleets ascend in fire;Accept the presents;
draw thy conquering sword;And be amongst our guardian gods adored.”Thus he: the
stern Achilles thus replied:“My second father, and my reverend guide:Thy friend,
believe me, no such gifts demands,And asks no honours from a mortal’s hands;Jove
honours me, and favours my designs;His pleasure guides me, and his will
confines;And here I stay (if such his high behest)While life’s warm spirit beats
within my breast.Yet hear one word, and lodge it in thy heart:No more molest me
on Atrides’ part:Is it for him these tears are taught to flow,For him these
sorrows? for my mortal foe?A generous friendship no cold medium knows,Burns with
one love, with one resentment glows;One should our interests and our passions
be;My friend must hate the man that injures me.Do this, my Phœnix, ’tis a
generous part;And share my realms, my honours, and my heart.Let these return:
our voyage, or our stay,Rest undetermined till the dawning day.”He ceased; then
order’d for the sage’s bedA warmer couch with numerous carpets spread.With that,
stern Ajax his long silence broke,And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke:“Hence
let us go—why waste we time in vain?See what effect our low submissions
gain!Liked or not liked, his words we must relate,The Greeks expect them, and
our heroes wait.Proud as he is, that iron heart retainsIts stubborn purpose, and
his friends disdains.Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed,On just atonement,
we remit the deed;A sire the slaughter of his son forgives;The price of blood
discharged, the murderer lives:The haughtiest hearts at length their rage
resign,And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.[213]The gods that unrelenting
breast have steel’d,And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield.One
woman-slave was ravish’d from thy arms:Lo, seven are offer’d, and of equal
charms.Then hear, Achilles! be of better mind;Revere thy roof, and to thy guests
be kind;And know the men of all the Grecian host,Who honour worth, and prize thy
valour most.”“O soul of battles, and thy people’s guide!(To Ajax thus the first
of Greeks replied)Well hast thou spoke; but at the tyrant’s nameMy rage
rekindles, and my soul’s on flame:’Tis just resentment, and becomes the
brave:Disgraced, dishonour’d, like the vilest slave!Return, then, heroes! and
our answer bear,The glorious combat is no more my care;Not till, amidst yon
sinking navy slain,The blood of Greeks shall dye the sable main;Not till the
flames, by Hector’s fury thrown,Consume your vessels, and approach my own;Just
there, the impetuous homicide shall stand,There cease his battle, and there feel
our hand.”This said, each prince a double goblet crown’d,And cast a large
libation on the ground;Then to their vessels, through the gloomy shades,The
chiefs return; divine Ulysses leads.Meantime Achilles’ slaves prepared a
bed,With fleeces, carpets, and soft linen spread:There, till the sacred morn
restored the day,In slumber sweet the reverend Phœnix lay.But in his inner tent,
an ampler space,Achilles slept; and in his warm embraceFair Diomede of the
Lesbian race.Last, for Patroclus was the couch prepared,Whose nightly joys the
beauteous Iphis shared;Achilles to his friend consign’d her charmsWhen Scyros
fell before his conquering arms.And now the elected chiefs whom Greece had
sent,Pass’d through the hosts, and reach’d the royal tent.Then rising all, with
goblets in their hands,The peers and leaders of the Achaian bandsHail’d their
return: Atrides first begun:“Say what success? divine Laertes’ son!Achilles’
high resolves declare to all:Returns the chief, or must our navy fall?”“Great
king of nations! (Ithacus replied)Fix’d is his wrath, unconquer’d is his
pride;He slights thy friendship, thy proposals scorns,And, thus implored, with
fiercer fury burns.To save our army, and our fleets to free,Is not his care; but
left to Greece and thee.Your eyes shall view, when morning paints the
sky,Beneath his oars the whitening billows fly;Us too he bids our oars and sails
employ,Nor hope the fall of heaven-protected Troy;For Jove o’ershades her with
his arm divine,Inspires her war, and bids her glory shine.Such was his word:
what further he declared,These sacred heralds and great Ajax heard.But Phœnix in
his tent the chief retains,Safe to transport him to his native plainsWhen
morning dawns; if other he decree,His age is sacred, and his choice is
free.”Ulysses ceased: the great Achaian host,With sorrow seized, in
consternation lost,Attend the stern reply. Tydides brokeThe general silence, and
undaunted spoke.“Why should we gifts to proud Achilles send,Or strive with
prayers his haughty soul to bend?His country’s woes he glories to deride,And
prayers will burst that swelling heart with pride.Be the fierce impulse of his
rage obey’d,Our battles let him or desert or aid;Then let him arm when Jove or
he think fit:That, to his madness, or to Heaven commit:What for ourselves we
can, is always ours;This night, let due repast refresh our powers;(For strength
consists in spirits and in blood,And those are owed to generous wine and
food;)But when the rosy messenger of dayStrikes the blue mountains with her
golden ray,Ranged at the ships, let all our squadrons shineIn flaming arms, a
long-extended line:In the dread front let great Atrides stand,The first in
danger, as in high command.”Shouts of acclaim the listening heroes raise,Then
each to Heaven the due libations pays;Till sleep, descending o’er the tents,
bestowsThe grateful blessings of desired repose.[214][Illustration: ]
ACHILLESBOOK X.ARGUMENT.THE NIGHT-ADVENTURE OF DIOMED AND ULYSSES.Upon the
refusal of Achilles to return to the army, the distress ofAgamemnon is described
in the most lively manner. He takes no rest thatnight, but passes through the
camp, awaking the leaders, and contrivingall possible methods for the public
safety. Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses,and Diomed are employed in raising the rest of
the captains. They calla council of war, and determine to send scouts into the
enemies’ camp,to learn their posture, and discover their intentions.
Diomedundertakes this hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of Ulysses forhis
companion. In their passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector hadsent on a like
design to the camp of the Grecians. From him they areinformed of the situation
of the Trojan and auxiliary forces, andparticularly of Rhesus, and the Thracians
who were lately arrived. Theypass on with success; kill Rhesus, with several of
his officers, andseize the famous horses of that prince, with which they return
intriumph to the camp. The same night continues; the scene lies in the two
camps.All night the chiefs before their vessels lay,And lost in sleep the
labours of the day:All but the king: with various thoughts oppress’d,[215]His
country’s cares lay rolling in his breast.As when by lightnings Jove’s ethereal
powerForetels the rattling hail, or weighty shower,Or sends soft snows to whiten
all the shore,Or bids the brazen throat of war to roar;By fits one flash
succeeds as one expires,And heaven flames thick with momentary fires:So bursting
frequent from Atrides’ breast,Sighs following sighs his inward fears
confess’d.Now o’er the fields, dejected, he surveysFrom thousand Trojan fires
the mounting blaze;Hears in the passing wind their music blow,And marks distinct
the voices of the foe.Now looking backwards to the fleet and coast,Anxious he
sorrows for the endangered host.He rends his hair, in sacrifice to Jove,And sues
to him that ever lives above:Inly he groans; while glory and despairDivide his
heart, and wage a double war.A thousand cares his labouring breast revolves;To
seek sage Nestor now the chief resolves,With him, in wholesome counsels, to
debateWhat yet remains to save the afflicted state.He rose, and first he cast
his mantle round,Next on his feet the shining sandals bound;A lion’s yellow
spoils his back conceal’d;His warlike hand a pointed javelin held.Meanwhile his
brother, press’d with equal woes,Alike denied the gifts of soft repose,Laments
for Greece, that in his cause beforeSo much had suffer’d and must suffer more.A
leopard’s spotted hide his shoulders spread:A brazen helmet glitter’d on his
head:Thus (with a javelin in his hand) he wentTo wake Atrides in the royal
tent.Already waked, Atrides he descried,His armour buckling at his vessel’s
side.Joyful they met; the Spartan thus begun:“Why puts my brother his bright
armour on?Sends he some spy, amidst these silent hours,To try yon camp, and
watch the Trojan powers?But say, what hero shall sustain that task?Such bold
exploits uncommon courage ask;Guideless, alone, through night’s dark shade to
go,And midst a hostile camp explore the foe.”To whom the king: “In such distress
we stand,No vulgar counsel our affairs demand;Greece to preserve, is now no easy
part,But asks high wisdom, deep design, and art.For Jove, averse, our humble
prayer denies,And bows his head to Hector’s sacrifice.What eye has witness’d, or
what ear believed,In one great day, by one great arm achieved,Such wondrous
deeds as Hector’s hand has done,And we beheld, the last revolving sun?What
honours the beloved of Jove adorn!Sprung from no god, and of no goddess born;Yet
such his acts, as Greeks unborn shall tell,And curse the battle where their
fathers fell.“Now speed thy hasty course along the fleet,There call great Ajax,
and the prince of Crete;Ourself to hoary Nestor will repair;To keep the guards
on duty be his care,(For Nestor’s influence best that quarter guides,Whose son
with Merion, o’er the watch presides.”)To whom the Spartan: “These thy orders
borne,Say, shall I stay, or with despatch return?”“There shall thou stay, (the
king of men replied,)Else may we miss to meet, without a guide,The paths so
many, and the camp so wide.Still, with your voice the slothful soldiers
raise,Urge by their fathers’ fame their future praise.Forget we now our state
and lofty birth;Not titles here, but works, must prove our worth.To labour is
the lot of man below;And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe.”This said, each
parted to his several cares:The king to Nestor’s sable ship repairs;The sage
protector of the Greeks he foundStretch’d in his bed with all his arms
around;The various-colour’d scarf, the shield he rears,The shining helmet, and
the pointed spears;The dreadful weapons of the warrior’s rage,That, old in arms,
disdain’d the peace of age.Then, leaning on his hand his watchful head,The hoary
monarch raised his eyes and said:“What art thou, speak, that on designs
unknown,While others sleep, thus range the camp alone;Seek’st thou some friend
or nightly sentinel?Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell.”“O son of
Neleus, (thus the king rejoin’d,)Pride of the Greeks, and glory of thy kind!Lo,
here the wretched Agamemnon stands,The unhappy general of the Grecian bands,Whom
Jove decrees with daily cares to bend,And woes, that only with his life shall
end!Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain,And scarce my heart
support its load of pain.No taste of sleep these heavy eyes have known,Confused,
and sad, I wander thus alone,With fears distracted, with no fix’d design;And all
my people’s miseries are mine.If aught of use thy waking thoughts suggest,(Since
cares, like mine, deprive thy soul of rest,)Impart thy counsel, and assist thy
friend;Now let us jointly to the trench descend,At every gate the fainting guard
excite,Tired with the toils of day and watch of night;Else may the sudden foe
our works invade,So near, and favour’d by the gloomy shade.”To him thus Nestor:
“Trust the powers above,Nor think proud Hector’s hopes confirm’d by Jove:How ill
agree the views of vain mankind,And the wise counsels of the eternal
mind!Audacious Hector, if the gods ordainThat great Achilles rise and rage
again,What toils attend thee, and what woes remain!Lo, faithful Nestor thy
command obeys;The care is next our other chiefs to raise:Ulysses, Diomed, we
chiefly need;Meges for strength, Oïleus famed for speed.Some other be despatch’d
of nimbler feet,To those tall ships, remotest of the fleet,Where lie great Ajax
and the king of Crete.[216]To rouse the Spartan I myself decree;Dear as he is to
us, and dear to thee,Yet must I tax his sloth, that claims no shareWith his
great brother in his martial care:Him it behoved to every chief to
sue,Preventing every part perform’d by you;For strong necessity our toils
demands,Claims all our hearts, and urges all our hands.”To whom the king: “With
reverence we allowThy just rebukes, yet learn to spare them now:My generous
brother is of gentle kind,He seems remiss, but bears a valiant mind;Through too
much deference to our sovereign sway,Content to follow when we lead the way:But
now, our ills industrious to prevent,Long ere the rest he rose, and sought my
tent.The chiefs you named, already at his call,Prepare to meet us near the
navy-wall;Assembling there, between the trench and gates,Near the night-guards,
our chosen council waits.”“Then none (said Nestor) shall his rule withstand,For
great examples justify command.”With that, the venerable warrior rose;The
shining greaves his manly legs enclose;His purple mantle golden buckles
join’d,Warm with the softest wool, and doubly lined.Then rushing from his tent,
he snatch’d in hasteHis steely lance, that lighten’d as he pass’d.The camp he
traversed through the sleeping crowd,Stopp’d at Ulysses’ tent, and call’d
aloud.Ulysses, sudden as the voice was sent,Awakes, starts up, and issues from
his tent.“What new distress, what sudden cause of fright,Thus leads you
wandering in the silent night?”“O prudent chief! (the Pylian sage replied)Wise
as thou art, be now thy wisdom tried:Whatever means of safety can be
sought,Whatever counsels can inspire our thought,Whatever methods, or to fly or
fight;All, all depend on this important night!”He heard, return’d, and took his
painted shield;Then join’d the chiefs, and follow’d through the field.Without
his tent, bold Diomed they found,All sheathed in arms, his brave companions
round:Each sunk in sleep, extended on the field,His head reclining on his bossy
shield.A wood of spears stood by, that, fix’d upright,Shot from their flashing
points a quivering light.A bull’s black hide composed the hero’s bed;A splendid
carpet roll’d beneath his head.Then, with his foot, old Nestor gently shakesThe
slumbering chief, and in these words awakes:“Rise, son of Tydeus! to the brave
and strongRest seems inglorious, and the night too long.But sleep’st thou now,
when from yon hill the foeHangs o’er the fleet, and shades our walls below?”At
this, soft slumber from his eyelids fled;The warrior saw the hoary chief, and
said:“Wondrous old man! whose soul no respite knows,Though years and honours bid
thee seek repose,Let younger Greeks our sleeping warriors wake;Ill fits thy age
these toils to undertake.”“My friend, (he answered,) generous is thy care;These
toils, my subjects and my sons might bear;Their loyal thoughts and pious love
conspireTo ease a sovereign and relieve a sire:But now the last despair
surrounds our host;No hour must pass, no moment must be lost;Each single Greek,
in this conclusive strife,Stands on the sharpest edge of death or life:Yet, if
my years thy kind regard engage,Employ thy youth as I employ my age;Succeed to
these my cares, and rouse the rest;He serves me most, who serves his country
best.”This said, the hero o’er his shoulders flungA lion’s spoils, that to his
ankles hung;Then seized his ponderous lance, and strode along.Meges the bold,
with Ajax famed for speed,The warrior roused, and to the entrenchments lead.And
now the chiefs approach the nightly guard;A wakeful squadron, each in arms
prepared:The unwearied watch their listening leaders keep,And, couching close,
repel invading sleep.So faithful dogs their fleecy charge maintain,With toil
protected from the prowling train;When the gaunt lioness, with hunger
bold,Springs from the mountains toward the guarded fold:Through breaking woods
her rustling course they hear;Loud, and more loud, the clamours strike their
earOf hounds and men: they start, they gaze around,Watch every side, and turn to
every sound.Thus watch’d the Grecians, cautious of surprise,Each voice, each
motion, drew their ears and eyes:Each step of passing feet increased the
affright;And hostile Troy was ever full in sight.Nestor with joy the wakeful
band survey’d,And thus accosted through the gloomy shade.“’Tis well, my sons!
your nightly cares employ;Else must our host become the scorn of Troy.Watch
thus, and Greece shall live.” The hero said;Then o’er the trench the following
chieftains led.His son, and godlike Merion, march’d behind(For these the princes
to their council join’d).The trenches pass’d, the assembled kings aroundIn
silent state the consistory crown’d.A place there was, yet undefiled with
gore,The spot where Hector stopp’d his rage before;When night descending, from
his vengeful handReprieved the relics of the Grecian band:(The plain beside with
mangled corps was spread,And all his progress mark’d by heaps of dead:)There sat
the mournful kings: when Neleus’ son,The council opening, in these words
begun:“Is there (said he) a chief so greatly brave,His life to hazard, and his
country save?Lives there a man, who singly dares to goTo yonder camp, or seize
some straggling foe?Or favour’d by the night approach so near,Their speech,
their counsels, and designs to hear?If to besiege our navies they prepare,Or
Troy once more must be the seat of war?This could he learn, and to our peers
recite,And pass unharm’d the dangers of the night;What fame were his through all
succeeding days,While Phœbus shines, or men have tongues to praise!What gifts
his grateful country would bestow!What must not Greece to her deliverer owe?A
sable ewe each leader should provide,With each a sable lambkin by her side;At
every rite his share should be increased,And his the foremost honours of the
feast.”Fear held them mute: alone, untaught to fear,Tydides spoke—“The man you
seek is here.Through yon black camps to bend my dangerous way,Some god within
commands, and I obey.But let some other chosen warrior join,To raise my hopes,
and second my design.By mutual confidence and mutual aid,Great deeds are done,
and great discoveries made;The wise new prudence from the wise acquire,And one
brave hero fans another’s fire.”Contending leaders at the word arose;Each
generous breast with emulation glows;So brave a task each Ajax strove to
share,Bold Merion strove, and Nestor’s valiant heir;The Spartan wish’d the
second place to gain,And great Ulysses wish’d, nor wish’d in vain.Then thus the
king of men the contest ends:“Thou first of warriors, and thou best of
friends,Undaunted Diomed! what chief to joinIn this great enterprise, is only
thine.Just be thy choice, without affection made;To birth, or office, no respect
be paid;Let worth determine here.” The monarch spake,And inly trembled for his
brother’s sake.“Then thus (the godlike Diomed rejoin’d)My choice declares the
impulse of my mind.How can I doubt, while great Ulysses standsTo lend his
counsels and assist our hands?A chief, whose safety is Minerva’s care;So famed,
so dreadful, in the works of war:Bless’d in his conduct, I no aid require;Wisdom
like his might pass through flames of fire.”“It fits thee not, before these
chiefs of fame,(Replied the sage,) to praise me, or to blame:Praise from a
friend, or censure from a foe,Are lost on hearers that our merits know.But let
us haste—Night rolls the hours away,The reddening orient shows the coming
day,The stars shine fainter on the ethereal plains,And of night’s empire but a
third remains.”Thus having spoke, with generous ardour press’d,In arms terrific
their huge limbs they dress’d.A two-edged falchion Thrasymed the brave,And ample
buckler, to Tydides gave:Then in a leathern helm he cased his head,Short of its
crest, and with no plume o’erspread:(Such as by youths unused to arms are
worn:)No spoils enrich it, and no studs adorn.Next him Ulysses took a shining
sword,A bow and quiver, with bright arrows stored:A well-proved casque, with
leather braces bound,(Thy gift, Meriones,) his temples crown’d;Soft wool within;
without, in order spread,[217]A boar’s white teeth grinn’d horrid o’er his
head.This from Amyntor, rich Ormenus’ son,Autolycus by fraudful rapine won,And
gave Amphidamas; from him the prizeMolus received, the pledge of social ties;The
helmet next by Merion was possess’d,And now Ulysses’ thoughtful temples
press’d.Thus sheathed in arms, the council they forsake,And dark through paths
oblique their progress take.Just then, in sign she favour’d their intent,A
long-wing’d heron great Minerva sent:This, though surrounding shades obscured
their view,By the shrill clang and whistling wings they knew.As from the right
she soar’d, Ulysses pray’d,Hail’d the glad omen, and address’d the maid:“O
daughter of that god whose arm can wieldThe avenging bolt, and shake the saber
shield!O thou! for ever present in my way,Who all my motions, all my toils
survey!Safe may we pass beneath the gloomy shade,Safe by thy succour to our
ships convey’d,And let some deed this signal night adorn,To claim the tears of
Trojans yet unborn.”Then godlike Diomed preferr’d his prayer:“Daughter of Jove,
unconquer’d Pallas! hear.Great queen of arms, whose favour Tydeus won,As thou
defend’st the sire, defend the son.When on Æsopus’ banks the banded powersOf
Greece he left, and sought the Theban towers,Peace was his charge; received with
peaceful show,He went a legate, but return’d a foe:Then help’d by thee, and
cover’d by thy shield,He fought with numbers, and made numbers yield.So now be
present, O celestial maid!So still continue to the race thine aid!A youthful
steer shall fall beneath the stroke,Untamed, unconscious of the galling
yoke,With ample forehead, and with spreading horns,Whose taper tops refulgent
gold adorns.”The heroes pray’d, and Pallas from the skiesAccords their vow,
succeeds their enterprise.Now, like two lions panting for the prey,With dreadful
thoughts they trace the dreary way,Through the black horrors of the ensanguined
plain,Through dust, through blood, o’er arms, and hills of slain.Nor less bold
Hector, and the sons of Troy,On high designs the wakeful hours employ;The
assembled peers their lofty chief enclosed;Who thus the counsels of his breast
proposed:“What glorious man, for high attempts prepared,Dares greatly venture
for a rich reward?Of yonder fleet a bold discovery make,What watch they keep,
and what resolves they take?If now subdued they meditate their flight,And, spent
with toil, neglect the watch of night?His be the chariot that shall please him
most,Of all the plunder of the vanquish’d host;His the fair steeds that all the
rest excel,And his the glory to have served so well.”A youth there was among the
tribes of Troy,Dolon his name, Eumedes’ only boy,(Five girls beside the reverend
herald told.)Rich was the son in brass, and rich in gold;Not bless’d by nature
with the charms of face,But swift of foot, and matchless in the race.“Hector!
(he said) my courage bids me meetThis high achievement, and explore the
fleet:But first exalt thy sceptre to the skies,And swear to grant me the
demanded prize;The immortal coursers, and the glittering car,That bear Pelides
through the ranks of war.Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go,Fulfil thy wish,
their whole intention know,Even to the royal tent pursue my way,And all their
counsels, all their aims betray.”The chief then heaved the golden sceptre
high,Attesting thus the monarch of the sky:“Be witness thou! immortal lord of
all!Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall:By none but Dolon shall this prize
be borne,And him alone the immortal steeds adorn.”Thus Hector swore: the gods
were call’d in vain,But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain:Across his
back the bended bow he flung,A wolf’s grey hide around his shoulders hung,A
ferret’s downy fur his helmet lined,And in his hand a pointed javelin
shined.Then (never to return) he sought the shore,And trod the path his feet
must tread no more.Scarce had he pass’d the steeds and Trojan throng,(Still
bending forward as he coursed along,)When, on the hollow way, the approaching
treadUlysses mark’d, and thus to Diomed;“O friend! I hear some step of hostile
feet,Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet;Some spy, perhaps, to lurk
beside the main;Or nightly pillager that strips the slain.Yet let him pass, and
win a little space;Then rush behind him, and prevent his pace.But if too swift
of foot he flies before,Confine his course along the fleet and shore,Betwixt the
camp and him our spears employ,And intercept his hoped return to Troy.”With that
they stepp’d aside, and stoop’d their head,(As Dolon pass’d,) behind a heap of
dead:Along the path the spy unwary flew;Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs
pursue.So distant they, and such the space between,As when two teams of mules
divide the green,(To whom the hind like shares of land allows,)When now new
furrows part the approaching ploughs.Now Dolon, listening, heard them as they
pass’d;Hector (he thought) had sent, and check’d his haste,Till scarce at
distance of a javelin’s throw,No voice succeeding, he perceived the foe.As when
two skilful hounds the leveret wind;Or chase through woods obscure the trembling
hind;Now lost, now seen, they intercept his way,And from the herd still turn the
flying prey:So fast, and with such fears, the Trojan flew;So close, so constant,
the bold Greeks pursue.Now almost on the fleet the dastard falls,And mingles
with the guards that watch the walls;When brave Tydides stopp’d; a gen’rous
thought(Inspired by Pallas) in his bosom wrought,Lest on the foe some forward
Greek advance,And snatch the glory from his lifted lance.Then thus aloud:
“Whoe’er thou art, remain;This javelin else shall fix thee to the plain.”He
said, and high in air the weapon cast,Which wilful err’d, and o’er his shoulder
pass’d;Then fix’d in earth. Against the trembling woodThe wretch stood propp’d,
and quiver’d as he stood;A sudden palsy seized his turning head;His loose teeth
chatter’d, and his colour fled;The panting warriors seize him as he stands,And
with unmanly tears his life demands.“O spare my youth, and for the breath I
owe,Large gifts of price my father shall bestow:Vast heaps of brass shall in
your ships be told,And steel well-temper’d and refulgent gold.”To whom Ulysses
made this wise reply:“Whoe’er thou art, be bold, nor fear to die.What moves
thee, say, when sleep has closed the sight,To roam the silent fields in dead of
night?Cam’st thou the secrets of our camp to find,By Hector prompted, or thy
daring mind?Or art some wretch by hopes of plunder led,Through heaps of carnage,
to despoil the dead?”Then thus pale Dolon, with a fearful look:(Still, as he
spoke, his limbs with horror shook:)“Hither I came, by Hector’s words
deceived;Much did he promise, rashly I believed:No less a bribe than great
Achilles’ car,And those swift steeds that sweep the ranks of war,Urged me,
unwilling, this attempt to make;To learn what counsels, what resolves you
take:If now subdued, you fix your hopes on flight,And, tired with toils, neglect
the watch of night.”“Bold was thy aim, and glorious was the prize,(Ulysses, with
a scornful smile, replies,)Far other rulers those proud steeds demand,And scorn
the guidance of a vulgar hand;Even great Achilles scarce their rage can
tame,Achilles sprung from an immortal dame.But say, be faithful, and the truth
recite!Where lies encamp’d the Trojan chief to-night?Where stand his coursers?
in what quarter sleepTheir other princes? tell what watch they keep:Say, since
this conquest, what their counsels are;Or here to combat, from their city far,Or
back to Ilion’s walls transfer the war?”Ulysses thus, and thus Eumedes’
son:“What Dolon knows, his faithful tongue shall own.Hector, the peers
assembling in his tent,A council holds at Ilus’ monument.No certain guards the
nightly watch partake;Where’er yon fires ascend, the Trojans wake:Anxious for
Troy, the guard the natives keep;Safe in their cares, the auxiliar forces
sleep,Whose wives and infants, from the danger far,Discharge their souls of half
the fears of war.”“Then sleep those aids among the Trojan train,(Inquired the
chief,) or scattered o’er the plain?”To whom the spy: “Their powers they thus
disposeThe Paeons, dreadful with their bended bows,The Carians, Caucons, the
Pelasgian host,And Leleges, encamp along the coast.Not distant far, lie higher
on the landThe Lycian, Mysian, and Mæonian band,And Phrygia’s horse, by
Thymbras’ ancient wall;The Thracians utmost, and apart from all.These Troy but
lately to her succour won,Led on by Rhesus, great Eioneus’ son:I saw his
coursers in proud triumph go,Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow;Rich
silver plates his shining car infold;His solid arms, refulgent, flame with
gold;No mortal shoulders suit the glorious load,Celestial panoply, to grace a
god!Let me, unhappy, to your fleet be borne,Or leave me here, a captive’s fate
to mourn,In cruel chains, till your return revealThe truth or falsehood of the
news I tell.”To this Tydides, with a gloomy frown:“Think not to live, though all
the truth be shown:Shall we dismiss thee, in some future strifeTo risk more
bravely thy now forfeit life?Or that again our camps thou may’st explore?No—once
a traitor, thou betray’st no more.”Sternly he spoke, and as the wretch
preparedWith humble blandishment to stroke his beard,Like lightning swift the
wrathful falchion flew,Divides the neck, and cuts the nerves in two;One instant
snatch’d his trembling soul to hell,The head, yet speaking, mutter’d as it
fell.The furry helmet from his brow they tear,The wolf’s grey hide, the unbended
bow and spear;These great Ulysses lifting to the skies,To favouring Pallas
dedicates the prize:“Great queen of arms, receive this hostile spoil,And let the
Thracian steeds reward our toil;Thee, first of all the heavenly host, we
praise;O speed our labours, and direct our ways!”This said, the spoils, with
dropping gore defaced,High on a spreading tamarisk he placed;Then heap’d with
reeds and gathered boughs the plain,To guide their footsteps to the place
again.Through the still night they cross the devious fields,Slippery with blood,
o’er arms and heaps of shields,Arriving where the Thracian squadrons lay,And
eased in sleep the labours of the day.Ranged in three lines they view the
prostrate band:The horses yoked beside each warrior stand.Their arms in order on
the ground reclined,Through the brown shade the fulgid weapons shined:Amidst lay
Rhesus, stretch’d in sleep profound,And the white steeds behind his chariot
bound.The welcome sight Ulysses first descries,And points to Diomed the tempting
prize.“The man, the coursers, and the car behold!Described by Dolon, with the
arms of gold.Now, brave Tydides! now thy courage try,Approach the chariot, and
the steeds untie;Or if thy soul aspire to fiercer deeds,Urge thou the slaughter,
while I seize the steeds.”Pallas (this said) her hero’s bosom warms,Breathed in
his heart, and strung his nervous arms;Where’er he pass’d, a purple stream
pursuedHis thirsty falchion, fat with hostile blood,Bathed all his footsteps,
dyed the fields with gore,And a low groan remurmur’d through the shore.So the
grim lion, from his nightly den,O’erleaps the fences, and invades the pen,On
sheep or goats, resistless in his way,He falls, and foaming rends the guardless
prey;Nor stopp’d the fury of his vengeful hand,Till twelve lay breathless of the
Thracian band.Ulysses following, as his partner slew,Back by the foot each
slaughter’d warrior drew;The milk-white coursers studious to conveySafe to the
ships, he wisely cleared the way:Lest the fierce steeds, not yet to battles
bred,Should start, and tremble at the heaps of dead.Now twelve despatch’d, the
monarch last they found;Tydides’ falchion fix’d him to the ground.Just then a
deathful dream Minerva sent,A warlike form appear’d before his tent,Whose
visionary steel his bosom tore:So dream’d the monarch, and awaked no
more.[218]Ulysses now the snowy steeds detains,And leads them, fasten’d by the
silver reins;These, with his bow unbent, he lash’d along;(The scourge forgot, on
Rhesus’ chariot hung;)Then gave his friend the signal to retire;But him, new
dangers, new achievements fire;Doubtful he stood, or with his reeking bladeTo
send more heroes to the infernal shade,Drag off the car where Rhesus’ armour
lay,Or heave with manly force, and lift away.While unresolved the son of Tydeus
stands,Pallas appears, and thus her chief commands:“Enough, my son; from further
slaughter cease,Regard thy safety, and depart in peace;Haste to the ships, the
gotten spoils enjoy,Nor tempt too far the hostile gods of Troy.”The voice divine
confess’d the martial maid;In haste he mounted, and her word obey’d;The coursers
fly before Ulysses’ bow,Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow.Not
unobserved they pass’d: the god of lightHad watch’d his Troy, and mark’d
Minerva’s flight,Saw Tydeus’ son with heavenly succour bless’d,And vengeful
anger fill’d his sacred breast.Swift to the Trojan camp descends the power,And
wakes Hippocoon in the morning-hour;(On Rhesus’ side accustom’d to attend,A
faithful kinsman, and instructive friend;)He rose, and saw the field deform’d
with blood,An empty space where late the coursers stood,The yet-warm Thracians
panting on the coast;For each he wept, but for his Rhesus most:Now while on
Rhesus’ name he calls in vain,The gathering tumult spreads o’er all the plain;On
heaps the Trojans rush, with wild affright,And wondering view the slaughters of
the night.Meanwhile the chiefs, arriving at the shadeWhere late the spoils of
Hector’s spy were laid,Ulysses stopp’d; to him Tydides boreThe trophy, dropping
yet with Dolon’s gore:Then mounts again; again their nimbler feetThe coursers
ply, and thunder towards the fleet.[Illustration: ] DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING
WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUSOld Nestor first perceived the approaching
sound,Bespeaking thus the Grecian peers around:“Methinks the noise of trampling
steeds I hear,Thickening this way, and gathering on my ear;Perhaps some horses
of the Trojan breed(So may, ye gods! my pious hopes succeed)The great Tydides
and Ulysses bear,Return’d triumphant with this prize of war.Yet much I fear (ah,
may that fear be vain!)The chiefs outnumber’d by the Trojan train;Perhaps, even
now pursued, they seek the shore;Or, oh! perhaps those heroes are no
more.”Scarce had he spoke, when, lo! the chiefs appear,And spring to earth; the
Greeks dismiss their fear:With words of friendship and extended handsThey greet
the kings; and Nestor first demands:“Say thou, whose praises all our host
proclaim,Thou living glory of the Grecian name!Say whence these coursers? by
what chance bestow’d,The spoil of foes, or present of a god?Not those fair
steeds, so radiant and so gay,That draw the burning chariot of the day.Old as I
am, to age I scorn to yield,And daily mingle in the martial field;But sure till
now no coursers struck my sightLike these, conspicuous through the ranks of
fight.Some god, I deem, conferred the glorious prize,Bless’d as ye are, and
favourites of the skies;The care of him who bids the thunder roar,And her, whose
fury bathes the world with gore.”“Father! not so, (sage Ithacus rejoin’d,)The
gifts of heaven are of a nobler kind.Of Thracian lineage are the steeds ye
view,Whose hostile king the brave Tydides slew;Sleeping he died, with all his
guards around,And twelve beside lay gasping on the ground.These other spoils
from conquer’d Dolon came,A wretch, whose swiftness was his only fame;By Hector
sent our forces to explore,He now lies headless on the sandy shore.”Then o’er
the trench the bounding coursers flew;The joyful Greeks with loud acclaim
pursue.Straight to Tydides’ high pavilion borne,The matchless steeds his ample
stalls adorn:The neighing coursers their new fellows greet,And the full racks
are heap’d with generous wheat.But Dolon’s armour, to his ships convey’d,High on
the painted stern Ulysses laid,A trophy destin’d to the blue-eyed maid.Now from
nocturnal sweat and sanguine stainThey cleanse their bodies in the neighb’ring
main:Then in the polished bath, refresh’d from toil,Their joints they supple
with dissolving oil,In due repast indulge the genial hour,And first to Pallas
the libations pour:They sit, rejoicing in her aid divine,And the crown’d goblet
foams with floods of wine.BOOK XI.ARGUMENTTHE THIRD BATTLE, AND THE ACTS OF
AGAMEMNON.Agamemnon, having armed himself, leads the Grecians to battle;
Hectorprepares the Trojans to receive them, while Jupiter, Juno, and Minervagive
the signals of war. Agamemnon bears all before him and Hector iscommanded by
Jupiter (who sends Iris for that purpose) to decline theengagement, till the
king shall be wounded and retire from the field.He then makes a great slaughter
of the enemy. Ulysses and Diomed put astop to him for a time but the latter,
being wounded by Paris, isobliged to desert his companion, who is encompassed by
the Trojans,wounded, and in the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue
him.Hector comes against Ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes,
andrallies the Greeks. In the meantime Machaon, in the other wing of thearmy, is
pierced with an arrow by Paris, and carried from the fight inNestor’s chariot.
Achilles (who overlooked the action from his ship)sent Patroclus to inquire
which of the Greeks was wounded in thatmanner; Nestor entertains him in his tent
with an account of theaccidents of the day, and a long recital of some former
wars which heremembered, tending to put Patroclus upon persuading Achilles to
fightfor his countrymen, or at least to permit him to do it, clad inAchilles’
armour. Patroclus, on his return, meets Eurypylus alsowounded, and assists him
in that distress. This book opens with the eight-and-twentieth day of the poem,
and the same day, with its various actions and adventures is extended through
the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and part
of the eighteenth books. The scene lies in the field near the monument of
Ilus.The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,[219]Now rose refulgent from
Tithonus’ bed;With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,And gild the courts of
heaven with sacred light:When baleful Eris, sent by Jove’s command,The torch of
discord blazing in her hand,Through the red skies her bloody sign extends,And,
wrapt in tempests, o’er the fleet descends.High on Ulysses’ bark her horrid
standShe took, and thunder’d through the seas and land.Even Ajax and Achilles
heard the sound,Whose ships, remote, the guarded navy bound,Thence the black
fury through the Grecian throngWith horror sounds the loud Orthian song:The navy
shakes, and at the dire alarmsEach bosom boils, each warrior starts to arms.No
more they sigh, inglorious to return,But breathe revenge, and for the combat
burn.[Illustration: ] THE DESCENT OF DISCORDThe king of men his hardy host
inspiresWith loud command, with great example fires!Himself first rose, himself
before the restHis mighty limbs in radiant armour dress’d,And first he cased his
manly legs aroundIn shining greaves with silver buckles bound;The beaming
cuirass next adorn’d his breast,The same which once king Cinyras possess’d:(The
fame of Greece and her assembled hostHad reach’d that monarch on the Cyprian
coast;’Twas then, the friendship of the chief to gain,This glorious gift he
sent, nor sent in vain:)Ten rows of azure steel the work infold,Twice ten of
tin, and twelve of ductile gold;Three glittering dragons to the gorget
rise,Whose imitated scales against the skiesReflected various light, and arching
bow’d,Like colour’d rainbows o’er a showery cloud(Jove’s wondrous bow, of three
celestial dies,Placed as a sign to man amidst the skies).A radiant baldric, o’er
his shoulder tied,Sustain’d the sword that glitter’d at his side:Gold was the
hilt, a silver sheath encasedThe shining blade, and golden hangers graced.His
buckler’s mighty orb was next display’d,That round the warrior cast a dreadful
shade;Ten zones of brass its ample brim surround,And twice ten bosses the bright
convex crown’d:Tremendous Gorgon frown’d upon its field,And circling terrors
fill’d the expressive shield:Within its concave hung a silver thong,On which a
mimic serpent creeps along,His azure length in easy waves extends,Till in three
heads the embroider’d monster ends.Last o’er his brows his fourfold helm he
placed,With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;And in his hands two steely
javelins wields,That blaze to heaven, and lighten all the fields.That instant
Juno, and the martial maid,In happy thunders promised Greece their aid;High o’er
the chief they clash’d their arms in air,And, leaning from the clouds, expect
the war.Close to the limits of the trench and mound,The fiery coursers to their
chariots boundThe squires restrain’d: the foot, with those who wieldThe lighter
arms, rush forward to the field.To second these, in close array combined,The
squadrons spread their sable wings behind.Now shouts and tumults wake the tardy
sun,As with the light the warriors’ toils begun.Even Jove, whose thunder spoke
his wrath, distill’dRed drops of blood o’er all the fatal field;[220]The woes of
men unwilling to survey,And all the slaughters that must stain the day.Near
Ilus’ tomb, in order ranged around,The Trojan lines possess’d the rising
ground:There wise Polydamas and Hector stood;Æneas, honour’d as a guardian
god;Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine;The brother-warriors of Antenor’s line:With
youthful Acamas, whose beauteous faceAnd fair proportion match’d the ethereal
race.Great Hector, cover’d with his spacious shield,Plies all the troops, and
orders all the field.As the red star now shows his sanguine firesThrough the
dark clouds, and now in night retires,Thus through the ranks appear’d the
godlike man,Plunged in the rear, or blazing in the van;While streamy sparkles,
restless as he flies,Flash from his arms, as lightning from the skies.As
sweating reapers in some wealthy field,Ranged in two bands, their crooked
weapons wield,Bear down the furrows, till their labours meet;Thick fall the
heapy harvests at their feet:So Greece and Troy the field of war divide,And
falling ranks are strow’d on every side.None stoop’d a thought to base
inglorious flight;[221]But horse to horse, and man to man they fight,Not rabid
wolves more fierce contest their prey;Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign
the day.Discord with joy the scene of death descries,And drinks large slaughter
at her sanguine eyes:Discord alone, of all the immortal train,Swells the red
horrors of this direful plain:The gods in peace their golden mansions
fill,Ranged in bright order on the Olympian hill:But general murmurs told their
griefs above,And each accused the partial will of Jove.Meanwhile apart,
superior, and alone,The eternal Monarch, on his awful throne,Wrapt in the blaze
of boundless glory sate;And fix’d, fulfill’d the just decrees of fate.On earth
he turn’d his all-considering eyes,And mark’d the spot where Ilion’s towers
arise;The sea with ships, the fields with armies spread,The victor’s rage, the
dying, and the dead.Thus while the morning-beams, increasing bright,O’er
heaven’s pure azure spread the glowing light,Commutual death the fate of war
confounds,Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.But now (what time in some
sequester’d valeThe weary woodman spreads his sparing meal,When his tired arms
refuse the axe to rear,And claim a respite from the sylvan war;But not till half
the prostrate forests layStretch’d in long ruin, and exposed to day)Then, nor
till then, the Greeks’ impulsive mightPierced the black phalanx, and let in the
light.Great Agamemnon then the slaughter led,And slew Bienor at his people’s
head:Whose squire Oïleus, with a sudden spring,Leap’d from the chariot to
revenge his king;But in his front he felt the fatal wound,Which pierced his
brain, and stretch’d him on the ground.Atrides spoil’d, and left them on the
plain:Vain was their youth, their glittering armour vain:Now soil’d with dust,
and naked to the sky,Their snowy limbs and beauteous bodies lie.Two sons of
Priam next to battle move,The product, one of marriage, one of love:[222]In the
same car the brother-warriors ride;This took the charge to combat, that to
guide:Far other task, than when they wont to keep,On Ida’s tops, their father’s
fleecy sheep.These on the mountains once Achilles found,And captive led, with
pliant osiers bound;Then to their sire for ample sums restored;But now to perish
by Atrides’ sword:Pierced in the breast the base-born Isus bleeds:Cleft through
the head his brother’s fate succeeds,Swift to the spoil the hasty victor
falls,And, stript, their features to his mind recalls.The Trojans see the youths
untimely die,But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.So when a lion ranging
o’er the lawns,Finds, on some grassy lair, the couching fawns,Their bones he
cracks, their reeking vitals draws,And grinds the quivering flesh with bloody
jaws;The frighted hind beholds, and dares not stay,But swift through rustling
thickets bursts her way;All drown’d in sweat, the panting mother flies,And the
big tears roll trickling from her eyes.Amidst the tumult of the routed train,The
sons of false Antimachus were slain;He who for bribes his faithless counsels
sold,And voted Helen’s stay for Paris’ gold.Atrides mark’d, as these their
safety sought,And slew the children for the father’s fault;Their headstrong
horse unable to restrain,They shook with fear, and dropp’d the silken rein;Then
in the chariot on their knees they fall,And thus with lifted hands for mercy
call:“O spare our youth, and for the life we owe,Antimachus shall copious gifts
bestow:Soon as he hears, that, not in battle slain,The Grecian ships his captive
sons detain,Large heaps of brass in ransom shall be told,And steel
well-tempered, and persuasive gold.”These words, attended with the flood of
tears,The youths address’d to unrelenting ears:The vengeful monarch gave this
stern reply:“If from Antimachus ye spring, ye die;The daring wretch who once in
council stoodTo shed Ulysses’ and my brother’s blood,For proffer’d peace! and
sues his seed for grace?No, die, and pay the forfeit of your race.”This said,
Pisander from the car he cast,And pierced his breast: supine he breathed his
last.His brother leap’d to earth; but, as he lay,The trenchant falchion lopp’d
his hands away;His sever’d head was toss’d among the throng,And, rolling, drew a
bloody train along.Then, where the thickest fought, the victor flew;The king’s
example all his Greeks pursue.Now by the foot the flying foot were slain,Horse
trod by horse, lay foaming on the plain.From the dry fields thick clouds of dust
arise,Shade the black host, and intercept the skies.The brass-hoof’d steeds
tumultuous plunge and bound,And the thick thunder beats the labouring
ground,Still slaughtering on, the king of men proceeds;The distanced army
wonders at his deeds,As when the winds with raging flames conspire,And o’er the
forests roll the flood of fire,In blazing heaps the grove’s old honours fall,And
one refulgent ruin levels all:Before Atrides’ rage so sinks the foe,Whole
squadrons vanish, and proud heads lie low.The steeds fly trembling from his
waving sword,And many a car, now lighted of its lord,Wide o’er the field with
guideless fury rolls,Breaking their ranks, and crushing out their souls;While
his keen falchion drinks the warriors’ lives;More grateful, now, to vultures
than their wives!Perhaps great Hector then had found his fate,But Jove and
destiny prolong’d his date.Safe from the darts, the care of heaven he
stood,Amidst alarms, and death, and dust, and blood.Now past the tomb where
ancient Ilus lay,Through the mid field the routed urge their way:Where the wild
figs the adjoining summit crown,The path they take, and speed to reach the
town.As swift, Atrides with loud shouts pursued,Hot with his toil, and bathed in
hostile blood.Now near the beech-tree, and the Scæan gates,The hero halts, and
his associates waits.Meanwhile on every side around the plain,Dispersed,
disorder’d, fly the Trojan train.So flies a herd of beeves, that hear
dismay’dThe lion’s roaring through the midnight shade;On heaps they tumble with
successless haste;The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last.Not with less
fury stern Atrides flew,Still press’d the rout, and still the hindmost
slew;Hurl’d from their cars the bravest chiefs are kill’d,And rage, and death,
and carnage load the field.Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall;Surveys the
towers, and meditates their fall.But Jove descending shook the Idaean hills,And
down their summits pour’d a hundred rills:The unkindled lightning in his hand he
took,And thus the many-coloured maid bespoke:“Iris, with haste thy golden wings
display,To godlike Hector this our word convey—While Agamemnon wastes the ranks
around,Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,Bid him give way;
but issue forth commands,And trust the war to less important hands:But when, or
wounded by the spear or dart,That chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,Then
Jove shall string his arm, and fire his breast,Then to her ships shall flying
Greece be press’d,Till to the main the burning sun descend,And sacred night her
awful shade extend.”He spoke, and Iris at his word obey’d;On wings of winds
descends the various maid.The chief she found amidst the ranks of war,Close to
the bulwarks, on his glittering car.The goddess then: “O son of Priam, hear!From
Jove I come, and his high mandate bear.While Agamemnon wastes the ranks
around,Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,Abstain from fight;
yet issue forth commands,And trust the war to less important hands:But when, or
wounded by the spear or dart,The chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,Then
Jove shall string thy arm, and fire thy breast,Then to her ships shall flying
Greece be press’d,Till to the main the burning sun descend,And sacred night her
awful shade extend.”She said, and vanish’d. Hector, with a bound,Springs from
his chariot on the trembling ground,In clanging arms: he grasps in either handA
pointed lance, and speeds from band to band;Revives their ardour, turns their
steps from flight,And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.They stand to arms:
the Greeks their onset dare,Condense their powers, and wait the coming war.New
force, new spirit, to each breast returns;The fight renew’d with fiercer fury
burns:The king leads on: all fix on him their eye,And learn from him to conquer,
or to die.Ye sacred nine! celestial Muses! tell,Who faced him first, and by his
prowess fell?The great Iphidamas, the bold and young,From sage Antenor and
Theano sprung;Whom from his youth his grandsire Cisseus bred,And nursed in
Thrace where snowy flocks are fed.Scarce did the down his rosy cheeks invest,And
early honour warm his generous breast,When the kind sire consign’d his
daughter’s charms(Theano’s sister) to his youthful arms.But call’d by glory to
the wars of Troy,He leaves untasted the first fruits of joy;From his loved bride
departs with melting eyes,And swift to aid his dearer country flies.With twelve
black ships he reach’d Percope’s strand,Thence took the long laborious march by
land.Now fierce for fame, before the ranks he springs,Towering in arms, and
braves the king of kings.Atrides first discharged the missive spear;The Trojan
stoop’d, the javelin pass’d in air.Then near the corslet, at the monarch’s
heart,With all his strength, the youth directs his dart:But the broad belt, with
plates of silver bound,The point rebated, and repell’d the wound.Encumber’d with
the dart, Atrides stands,Till, grasp’d with force, he wrench’d it from his
hands;At once his weighty sword discharged a woundFull on his neck, that fell’d
him to the ground.Stretch’d in the dust the unhappy warrior lies,And sleep
eternal seals his swimming eyes.Oh worthy better fate! oh early slain!Thy
country’s friend; and virtuous, though in vain!No more the youth shall join his
consort’s side,At once a virgin, and at once a bride!No more with presents her
embraces meet,Or lay the spoils of conquest at her feet,On whom his passion,
lavish of his store,Bestow’d so much, and vainly promised more!Unwept,
uncover’d, on the plain he lay,While the proud victor bore his arms away.Coon,
Antenor’s eldest hope, was nigh:Tears, at the sight, came starting from his
eye,While pierced with grief the much-loved youth he view’d,And the pale
features now deform’d with blood.Then, with his spear, unseen, his time he
took,Aim’d at the king, and near his elbow strook.The thrilling steel
transpierced the brawny part,And through his arm stood forth the barbed
dart.Surprised the monarch feels, yet void of fearOn Coon rushes with his lifted
spear:His brother’s corpse the pious Trojan draws,And calls his country to
assert his cause;Defends him breathless on the sanguine field,And o’er the body
spreads his ample shield.Atrides, marking an unguarded part,Transfix’d the
warrior with his brazen dart;Prone on his brother’s bleeding breast he lay,The
monarch’s falchion lopp’d his head away:The social shades the same dark journey
go,And join each other in the realms below.The vengeful victor rages round the
fields,With every weapon art or fury yields:By the long lance, the sword, or
ponderous stone,Whole ranks are broken, and whole troops o’erthrown.This, while
yet warm distill’d the purple flood;But when the wound grew stiff with clotted
blood,Then grinding tortures his strong bosom rend,Less keen those darts the
fierce Ilythiae send:(The powers that cause the teeming matron’s throes,Sad
mothers of unutterable woes!)Stung with the smart, all-panting with the pain,He
mounts the car, and gives his squire the rein;Then with a voice which fury made
more strong,And pain augmented, thus exhorts the throng:“O friends! O Greeks!
assert your honours won;Proceed, and finish what this arm begun:Lo! angry Jove
forbids your chief to stay,And envies half the glories of the day.”He said: the
driver whirls his lengthful thong;The horses fly; the chariot smokes
along.Clouds from their nostrils the fierce coursers blow,And from their sides
the foam descends in snow;Shot through the battle in a moment’s space,The
wounded monarch at his tent they place.No sooner Hector saw the king retired,But
thus his Trojans and his aids he fired:“Hear, all ye Dardan, all ye Lycian
race!Famed in close fight, and dreadful face to face:Now call to mind your
ancient trophies won,Your great forefathers’ virtues, and your own.Behold, the
general flies! deserts his powers!Lo, Jove himself declares the conquest
ours!Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds;And, sure of glory, dare
immortal deeds.”With words like these the fiery chief alarmsHis fainting host,
and every bosom warms.As the bold hunter cheers his hounds to tearThe brindled
lion, or the tusky bear:With voice and hand provokes their doubting heart,And
springs the foremost with his lifted dart:So godlike Hector prompts his troops
to dare;Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the war.On the black body of the
foe he pours;As from the cloud’s deep bosom, swell’d with showers,A sudden storm
the purple ocean sweeps,Drives the wild waves, and tosses all the deeps.Say,
Muse! when Jove the Trojan’s glory crown’d,Beneath his arm what heroes bit the
ground?Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died,Opites next was added to their
side;Then brave Hipponous, famed in many a fight,Opheltius, Orus, sunk to
endless night;Æsymnus, Agelaus; all chiefs of name;The rest were vulgar deaths
unknown to fame.As when a western whirlwind, charged with storms,Dispels the
gather’d clouds that Notus forms:The gust continued, violent and strong,Rolls
sable clouds in heaps on heaps along;Now to the skies the foaming billows
rears,Now breaks the surge, and wide the bottom bares:Thus, raging Hector, with
resistless hands,O’erturns, confounds, and scatters all their bands.Now the last
ruin the whole host appals;Now Greece had trembled in her wooden walls;But wise
Ulysses call’d Tydides forth,His soul rekindled, and awaked his worth.“And stand
we deedless, O eternal shame!Till Hector’s arm involve the ships in flame?Haste,
let us join, and combat side by side.”The warrior thus, and thus the friend
replied:“No martial toil I shun, no danger fear;Let Hector come; I wait his fury
here.But Jove with conquest crowns the Trojan train:And, Jove our foe, all human
force is vain.”He sigh’d; but, sighing, raised his vengeful steel,And from his
car the proud Thymbraeus fell:Molion, the charioteer, pursued his lord,His death
ennobled by Ulysses’ sword.There slain, they left them in eternal night,Then
plunged amidst the thickest ranks of fight.So two wild boars outstrip the
following hounds,Then swift revert, and wounds return for wounds.Stern Hector’s
conquests in the middle plainStood check’d awhile, and Greece respired again.The
sons of Merops shone amidst the war;Towering they rode in one refulgent car:In
deep prophetic arts their father skill’d,Had warn’d his children from the Trojan
field.Fate urged them on: the father warn’d in vain;They rush’d to fight, and
perish’d on the plain;Their breasts no more the vital spirit warms;The stern
Tydides strips their shining arms.Hypirochus by great Ulysses dies,And rich
Hippodamus becomes his prize.Great Jove from Ide with slaughter fills his
sight,And level hangs the doubtful scale of fight.By Tydeus’ lance Agastrophus
was slain,The far-famed hero of Pæonian strain;Wing’d with his fears, on foot he
strove to fly,His steeds too distant, and the foe too nigh:Through broken
orders, swifter than the wind,He fled, but flying left his life behind.This
Hector sees, as his experienced eyesTraverse the files, and to the rescue
flies;Shouts, as he pass’d, the crystal regions rend,And moving armies on his
march attend.Great Diomed himself was seized with fear,And thus bespoke his
brother of the war:“Mark how this way yon bending squadrons yield!The storm
rolls on, and Hector rules the field:Here stand his utmost force.”—The warrior
said;Swift at the word his ponderous javelin fled;Nor miss’d its aim, but where
the plumage dancedRazed the smooth cone, and thence obliquely glanced.Safe in
his helm (the gift of Phœbus’ hands)Without a wound the Trojan hero stands;But
yet so stunn’d, that, staggering on the plain.His arm and knee his sinking bulk
sustain;O’er his dim sight the misty vapours rise,And a short darkness shades
his swimming eyes.Tydides followed to regain his lance;While Hector rose,
recover’d from the trance,Remounts his car, and herds amidst the crowd:The Greek
pursues him, and exults aloud:“Once more thank Phœbus for thy forfeit breath,Or
thank that swiftness which outstrips the death.Well by Apollo are thy prayers
repaid,And oft that partial power has lent his aid.Thou shall not long the death
deserved withstand,If any god assist Tydides’ hand.Fly then, inglorious! but thy
flight, this day,Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay,”Him, while he
triumph’d, Paris eyed from far,(The spouse of Helen, the fair cause of
war;)Around the fields his feather’d shafts he sent,From ancient Ilus’ ruin’d
monument:Behind the column placed, he bent his bow,And wing’d an arrow at the
unwary foe;Just as he stoop’d, Agastrophus’s crestTo seize, and drew the corslet
from his breast,The bowstring twang’d; nor flew the shaft in vain,But pierced
his foot, and nail’d it to the plain.The laughing Trojan, with a joyful
spring.Leaps from his ambush, and insults the king.“He bleeds! (he cries) some
god has sped my dart!Would the same god had fix’d it in his heart!So Troy,
relieved from that wide-wasting hand,Should breathe from slaughter and in combat
stand:Whose sons now tremble at his darted spear,As scatter’d lambs the rushing
lion fear.”He dauntless thus: “Thou conqueror of the fair,Thou woman-warrior
with the curling hair;Vain archer! trusting to the distant dart,Unskill’d in
arms to act a manly part!Thou hast but done what boys or women can;Such hands
may wound, but not incense a man.Nor boast the scratch thy feeble arrow gave,A
coward’s weapon never hurts the brave.Not so this dart, which thou may’st one
day feel;Fate wings its flight, and death is on the steel:Where this but lights,
some noble life expires;Its touch makes orphans, bathes the cheeks of
sires,Steeps earth in purple, gluts the birds of air,And leaves such objects as
distract the fair.”Ulysses hastens with a trembling heart,Before him steps, and
bending draws the dart:Forth flows the blood; an eager pang succeeds;Tydides
mounts, and to the navy speeds.Now on the field Ulysses stands alone,The Greeks
all fled, the Trojans pouring on;But stands collected in himself, and whole,And
questions thus his own unconquer’d soul:“What further subterfuge, what hopes
remain?What shame, inglorious if I quit the plain?What danger, singly if I stand
the ground,My friends all scatter’d, all the foes around?Yet wherefore doubtful?
let this truth suffice,The brave meets danger, and the coward flies.To die or
conquer, proves a hero’s heart;And, knowing this, I know a soldier’s part.”Such
thoughts revolving in his careful breast,Near, and more near, the shady cohorts
press’d;These, in the warrior, their own fate enclose;And round him deep the
steely circle grows.So fares a boar whom all the troop surroundsOf shouting
huntsmen and of clamorous hounds;He grinds his ivory tusks; he foams with
ire;His sanguine eye-balls glare with living fire;By these, by those, on every
part is plied;And the red slaughter spreads on every side.Pierced through the
shoulder, first Deiopis fell;Next Ennomus and Thoon sank to hell;Chersidamas,
beneath the navel thrust,Falls prone to earth, and grasps the bloody
dust.Charops, the son of Hippasus, was near;Ulysses reach’d him with the fatal
spear;But to his aid his brother Socus flies,Socus the brave, the generous, and
the wise.Near as he drew, the warrior thus began:“O great Ulysses! much-enduring
man!Not deeper skill’d in every martial sleight,Than worn to toils, and active
in the fight!This day two brothers shall thy conquest grace,And end at once the
great Hippasian race,Or thou beneath this lance must press the field.”He said,
and forceful pierced his spacious shield:Through the strong brass the ringing
javelin thrown,Plough’d half his side, and bared it to the bone.By Pallas’ care,
the spear, though deep infix’d,Stopp’d short of life, nor with his entrails
mix’d.The wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew,Then furious thus (but first some
steps withdrew):“Unhappy man! whose death our hands shall grace,Fate calls thee
hence and finish’d is thy race.Nor longer check my conquests on the foe;But,
pierced by this, to endless darkness go,And add one spectre to the realms
below!”He spoke, while Socus, seized with sudden fright,Trembling gave way, and
turn’d his back to flight;Between his shoulders pierced the following dart,And
held its passage through the panting heart:Wide in his breast appear’d the
grisly wound;He falls; his armour rings against the ground.Then thus Ulysses,
gazing on the slain:“Famed son of Hippasus! there press the plain;There ends thy
narrow span assign’d by fate,Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date.Ah, wretch!
no father shall thy corpse compose;Thy dying eyes no tender mother close;But
hungry birds shall tear those balls away,And hovering vultures scream around
their prey.Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom,With solemn funerals and
a lasting tomb.”Then raging with intolerable smart,He writhes his body, and
extracts the dart.The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued,And gladden’d Troy
with sight of hostile blood.Now troops on troops the fainting chief
invade,Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid.Thrice to its pitch his lofty
voice he rears;The well-known voice thrice Menelaus hears:Alarm’d, to Ajax
Telamon he cried,Who shares his labours, and defends his side:“O friend!
Ulysses’ shouts invade my ear;Distressed he seems, and no assistance near;Strong
as he is, yet one opposed to all,Oppress’d by multitudes, the best may
fall.Greece robb’d of him must bid her host despair,And feel a loss not ages can
repair.”Then, where the cry directs, his course he bends;Great Ajax, like the
god of war, attends,The prudent chief in sore distress they found,With bands of
furious Trojans compass’d round.[223]As when some huntsman, with a flying
spear,From the blind thicket wounds a stately deer;Down his cleft side, while
fresh the blood distils,He bounds aloft, and scuds from hills to hills,Till
life’s warm vapour issuing through the wound,Wild mountain-wolves the fainting
beast surround:Just as their jaws his prostrate limbs invade,The lion rushes
through the woodland shade,The wolves, though hungry, scour dispersed away;The
lordly savage vindicates his prey.Ulysses thus, unconquer’d by his pains,A
single warrior half a host sustains:But soon as Ajax leaves his tower-like
shield,The scattered crowds fly frighted o’er the field;Atrides’ arm the sinking
hero stays,And, saved from numbers, to his car conveys.Victorious Ajax plies the
routed crew;And first Doryclus, Priam’s son, he slew,On strong Pandocus next
inflicts a wound,And lays Lysander bleeding on the ground.As when a torrent,
swell’d with wintry rains,Pours from the mountains o’er the deluged plains,And
pines and oaks, from their foundations torn,A country’s ruins! to the seas are
borne:Fierce Ajax thus o’erwhelms the yielding throng;Men, steeds, and chariots,
roll in heaps along.But Hector, from this scene of slaughter far,Raged on the
left, and ruled the tide of war:Loud groans proclaim his progress through the
plain,And deep Scamander swells with heaps of slain.There Nestor and Idomeneus
opposeThe warrior’s fury; there the battle glows;There fierce on foot, or from
the chariot’s height,His sword deforms the beauteous ranks of fight.The spouse
of Helen, dealing darts around,Had pierced Machaon with a distant wound:In his
right shoulder the broad shaft appear’d,And trembling Greece for her physician
fear’d.To Nestor then Idomeneus begun:“Glory of Greece, old Neleus’ valiant
son!Ascend thy chariot, haste with speed away,And great Machaon to the ships
convey;A wise physician skill’d our wounds to heal,Is more than armies to the
public weal.”Old Nestor mounts the seat; beside him rodeThe wounded offspring of
the healing god.He lends the lash; the steeds with sounding feetShake the dry
field, and thunder toward the fleet.But now Cebriones, from Hector’s
car,Survey’d the various fortune of the war:“While here (he cried) the flying
Greeks are slain,Trojans on Trojans yonder load the plain.Before great Ajax see
the mingled throngOf men and chariots driven in heaps along!I know him well,
distinguish’d o’er the fieldBy the broad glittering of the sevenfold
shield.Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy steeds,There danger calls, and there
the combat bleeds;There horse and foot in mingled deaths unite,And groans of
slaughter mix with shouts of fight.”Thus having spoke, the driver’s lash
resounds;Swift through the ranks the rapid chariot bounds;Stung by the stroke,
the coursers scour the fields,O’er heaps of carcases, and hills of shields.The
horses’ hoofs are bathed in heroes’ gore,And, dashing, purple all the car
before;The groaning axle sable drops distils,And mangled carnage clogs the rapid
wheels.Here Hector, plunging through the thickest fight,Broke the dark phalanx,
and let in the light:(By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone,The ranks
he scatter’d and the troops o’erthrown:)Ajax he shuns, through all the dire
debate,And fears that arm whose force he felt so late.But partial Jove,
espousing Hector’s part,Shot heaven-bred horror through the Grecian’s
heart;Confused, unnerved in Hector’s presence grown,Amazed he stood, with
terrors not his own.O’er his broad back his moony shield he threw,And, glaring
round, by tardy steps withdrew.Thus the grim lion his retreat maintains,Beset
with watchful dogs, and shouting swains;Repulsed by numbers from the nightly
stalls,Though rage impels him, and though hunger calls,Long stands the showering
darts, and missile fires;Then sourly slow the indignant beast retires:So turn’d
stern Ajax, by whole hosts repell’d,While his swoln heart at every step
rebell’d.As the slow beast, with heavy strength endued,In some wide field by
troops of boys pursued,Though round his sides a wooden tempest rain,Crops the
tall harvest, and lays waste the plain;Thick on his hide the hollow blows
resound,The patient animal maintains his ground,Scarce from the field with all
their efforts chased,And stirs but slowly when he stirs at last:On Ajax thus a
weight of Trojans hung,The strokes redoubled on his buckler rung;Confiding now
in bulky strength he stands,Now turns, and backward bears the yielding bands;Now
stiff recedes, yet hardly seems to fly,And threats his followers with retorted
eye.Fix’d as the bar between two warring powers,While hissing darts descend in
iron showers:In his broad buckler many a weapon stood,Its surface bristled with
a quivering wood;And many a javelin, guiltless on the plain,Marks the dry dust,
and thirsts for blood in vain.But bold Eurypylus his aid imparts,And dauntless
springs beneath a cloud of darts;Whose eager javelin launch’d against the
foe,Great Apisaon felt the fatal blow;From his torn liver the red current
flow’d,And his slack knees desert their dying load.The victor rushing to despoil
the dead,From Paris’ bow a vengeful arrow fled;Fix’d in his nervous thigh the
weapon stood,Fix’d was the point, but broken was the wood.Back to the lines the
wounded Greek retired,Yet thus retreating, his associates fired:“What god, O
Grecians! has your hearts dismay’d?Oh, turn to arms; ’tis Ajax claims your
aid.This hour he stands the mark of hostile rage,And this the last brave battle
he shall wage:Haste, join your forces; from the gloomy graveThe warrior rescue,
and your country save.”Thus urged the chief: a generous troop appears,Who spread
their bucklers, and advance their spears,To guard their wounded friend: while
thus they standWith pious care, great Ajax joins the band:Each takes new courage
at the hero’s sight;The hero rallies, and renews the fight.Thus raged both
armies like conflicting fires,While Nestor’s chariot far from fight retires:His
coursers steep’d in sweat, and stain’d with gore,The Greeks’ preserver, great
Machaon, bore.That hour Achilles, from the topmost heightOf his proud fleet,
o’erlook’d the fields of fight;His feasted eyes beheld around the plainThe
Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain.His friend Machaon singled from the
rest,A transient pity touch’d his vengeful breast.Straight to Menoetius’
much-loved son he sent:Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent;In evil hour!
Then fate decreed his doom,And fix’d the date of all his woes to come.“Why calls
my friend? thy loved injunctions lay;Whate’er thy will, Patroclus shall obey.”“O
first of friends! (Pelides thus replied)Still at my heart, and ever at my
side!The time is come, when yon despairing hostShall learn the value of the man
they lost:Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan,And proud Atrides
tremble on his throne.Go now to Nestor, and from him be taughtWhat wounded
warrior late his chariot brought:For, seen at distance, and but seen behind,His
form recall’d Machaon to my mind;Nor could I, through yon cloud, discern his
face,The coursers pass’d me with so swift a pace.”The hero said. His friend
obey’d with haste,Through intermingled ships and tents he pass’d;The chiefs
descending from their car he found:The panting steeds Eurymedon unbound.The
warriors standing on the breezy shore,To dry their sweat, and wash away the
gore,Here paused a moment, while the gentle galeConvey’d that freshness the cool
seas exhale;Then to consult on farther methods went,And took their seats beneath
the shady tent.The draught prescribed, fair Hecamede prepares,Arsinous’
daughter, graced with golden hairs:(Whom to his aged arms, a royal slave,Greece,
as the prize of Nestor’s wisdom gave:)A table first with azure feet she
placed;Whose ample orb a brazen charger graced;Honey new-press’d, the sacred
flour of wheat,And wholesome garlic, crown’d the savoury treat,Next her white
hand an antique goblet brings,A goblet sacred to the Pylian kingsFrom eldest
times: emboss’d with studs of gold,Two feet support it, and four handles hold;On
each bright handle, bending o’er the brink,In sculptured gold, two turtles seem
to drink:A massy weight, yet heaved with ease by him,When the brisk nectar
overlook’d the brim.Temper’d in this, the nymph of form divinePours a large
portion of the Pramnian wine;With goat’s-milk cheese a flavourous taste
bestows,And last with flour the smiling surface strows:This for the wounded
prince the dame prepares:The cordial beverage reverend Nestor shares:Salubrious
draughts the warriors’ thirst allay,And pleasing conference beguiles the
day.Meantime Patroclus, by Achilles sent,Unheard approached, and stood before
the tent.Old Nestor, rising then, the hero ledTo his high seat: the chief
refused and said:“’Tis now no season for these kind delays;The great Achilles
with impatience stays.To great Achilles this respect I owe;Who asks, what hero,
wounded by the foe,Was borne from combat by thy foaming steeds?With grief I see
the great Machaon bleeds.This to report, my hasty course I bend;Thou know’st the
fiery temper of my friend.”“Can then the sons of Greece (the sage
rejoin’d)Excite compassion in Achilles’ mind?Seeks he the sorrows of our host to
know?This is not half the story of our woe.Tell him, not great Machaon bleeds
alone,Our bravest heroes in the navy groan,Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed,And stern
Eurypylus, already bleed.But, ah! what flattering hopes I entertain!Achilles
heeds not, but derides our pain:Even till the flames consume our fleet he
stays,And waits the rising of the fatal blaze.Chief after chief the raging foe
destroys;Calm he looks on, and every death enjoys.Now the slow course of
all-impairing timeUnstrings my nerves, and ends my manly prime;Oh! had I still
that strength my youth possess’d,When this bold arm the Epeian powers
oppress’d,The bulls of Elis in glad triumph led,And stretch’d the great
Itymonaeus dead!Then from my fury fled the trembling swains,And ours was all the
plunder of the plains:Fifty white flocks, full fifty herds of swine,As many
goats, as many lowing kine:And thrice the number of unrivall’d steeds,All
teeming females, and of generous breeds.These, as my first essay of arms, I
won;Old Neleus gloried in his conquering son.Thus Elis forced, her long arrears
restored,And shares were parted to each Pylian lord.The state of Pyle was sunk
to last despair,When the proud Elians first commenced the war:For Neleus’ sons
Alcides’ rage had slain;Of twelve bold brothers, I alone remain!Oppress’d, we
arm’d; and now this conquest gain’d,My sire three hundred chosen sheep
obtain’d.(That large reprisal he might justly claim,For prize defrauded, and
insulted fame,When Elis’ monarch, at the public course,Detain’d his chariot, and
victorious horse.)The rest the people shared; myself survey’dThe just partition,
and due victims paid.Three days were past, when Elis rose to war,With many a
courser, and with many a car;The sons of Actor at their army’s head(Young as
they were) the vengeful squadrons led.High on the rock fair Thryoessa stands,Our
utmost frontier on the Pylian lands:Not far the streams of famed Alphaeus
flow:The stream they pass’d, and pitch’d their tents below.Pallas, descending in
the shades of night,Alarms the Pylians and commands the fight.Each burns for
fame, and swells with martial pride,Myself the foremost; but my sire
denied;Fear’d for my youth, exposed to stern alarms;And stopp’d my chariot, and
detain’d my arms.My sire denied in vain: on foot I fledAmidst our chariots; for
the goddess led.“Along fair Arene’s delightful plainSoft Minyas rolls his waters
to the main:There, horse and foot, the Pylian troops unite,And sheathed in arms,
expect the dawning light.Thence, ere the sun advanced his noon-day flame,To
great Alphaeus’ sacred source we came.There first to Jove our solemn rites were
paid;An untamed heifer pleased the blue-eyed maid;A bull, Alphaeus; and a bull
was slainTo the blue monarch of the watery main.In arms we slept, beside the
winding flood,While round the town the fierce Epeians stood.Soon as the sun,
with all-revealing ray,Flamed in the front of Heaven, and gave the day.Bright
scenes of arms, and works of war appear;The nations meet; there Pylos, Elis
here.The first who fell, beneath my javelin bled;King Augias’ son, and spouse of
Agamede:(She that all simples’ healing virtues knew,And every herb that drinks
the morning dew:)I seized his car, the van of battle led;The Epeians saw, they
trembled, and they fled.The foe dispersed, their bravest warrior kill’d,Fierce
as the whirlwind now I swept the field:Full fifty captive chariots graced my
train;Two chiefs from each fell breathless to the plain.Then Actor’s sons had
died, but Neptune shroudsThe youthful heroes in a veil of clouds.O’er heapy
shields, and o’er the prostrate throng,Collecting spoils, and slaughtering all
along,Through wide Buprasian fields we forced the foes,Where o’er the vales the
Olenian rocks arose;Till Pallas stopp’d us where Alisium flows.Even there the
hindmost of the rear I slay,And the same arm that led concludes the day;Then
back to Pyle triumphant take my way.There to high Jove were public thanks
assign’d,As first of gods; to Nestor, of mankind.Such then I was, impell’d by
youthful blood;So proved my valour for my country’s good.“Achilles with unactive
fury glows,And gives to passion what to Greece he owes.How shall he grieve, when
to the eternal shadeHer hosts shall sink, nor his the power to aid!O friend! my
memory recalls the day,When, gathering aids along the Grecian sea,I, and
Ulysses, touch’d at Phthia’s port,And entered Peleus’ hospitable court.A bull to
Jove he slew in sacrifice,And pour’d libations on the flaming thighs.Thyself,
Achilles, and thy reverend sireMenoetius, turn’d the fragments on the
fire.Achilles sees us, to the feast invites;Social we sit, and share the genial
rites.We then explained the cause on which we came,Urged you to arms, and found
you fierce for fame.Your ancient fathers generous precepts gave;Peleus said only
this:—‘My son! be brave.’Menoetius thus: ‘Though great Achilles shineIn strength
superior, and of race divine,Yet cooler thoughts thy elder years attend;Let thy
just counsels aid, and rule thy friend.’Thus spoke your father at Thessalia’s
court:Words now forgot, though now of vast import.Ah! try the utmost that a
friend can say:Such gentle force the fiercest minds obey;Some favouring god
Achilles’ heart may move;Though deaf to glory, he may yield to love.If some dire
oracle his breast alarm,If aught from Heaven withhold his saving arm,Some beam
of comfort yet on Greece may shine,If thou but lead the Myrmidonian line;Clad in
Achilles’ arms, if thou appear,Proud Troy may tremble, and desist from
war;Press’d by fresh forces, her o’er-labour’d trainShall seek their walls, and
Greece respire again.”This touch’d his generous heart, and from the tentAlong
the shore with hasty strides he went;Soon as he came, where, on the crowded
strand,The public mart and courts of justice stand,Where the tall fleet of great
Ulysses lies,And altars to the guardian gods arise;There, sad, he met the brave
Euaemon’s son,Large painful drops from all his members run;An arrow’s head yet
rooted in his wound,The sable blood in circles mark’d the ground.As faintly
reeling he confess’d the smart,Weak was his pace, but dauntless was his
heart.Divine compassion touch’d Patroclus’ breast,Who, sighing, thus his
bleeding friend address’d:“Ah, hapless leaders of the Grecian host!Thus must ye
perish on a barbarous coast?Is this your fate, to glut the dogs with gore,Far
from your friends, and from your native shore?Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece
yet stand?Resists she yet the raging Hector’s hand?Or are her heroes doom’d to
die with shame,And this the period of our wars and fame?”Eurypylus replies: “No
more, my friend;Greece is no more! this day her glories end;Even to the ships
victorious Troy pursues,Her force increasing as her toil renews.Those chiefs,
that used her utmost rage to meet,Lie pierced with wounds, and bleeding in the
fleet.But, thou, Patroclus! act a friendly part,Lead to my ships, and draw this
deadly dart;With lukewarm water wash the gore away;With healing balms the raging
smart allay,Such as sage Chiron, sire of pharmacy,Once taught Achilles, and
Achilles thee.Of two famed surgeons, Podalirius standsThis hour surrounded by
the Trojan bands;And great Machaon, wounded in his tent,Now wants that succour
which so oft he lent.”To him the chief: “What then remains to do?The event of
things the gods alone can view.Charged by Achilles’ great command I fly,And bear
with haste the Pylian king’s reply:But thy distress this instant claims
relief.”He said, and in his arms upheld the chief.The slaves their master’s slow
approach survey’d,And hides of oxen on the floor display’d:There stretch’d at
length the wounded hero lay;Patroclus cut the forky steel away:Then in his hands
a bitter root he bruised;The wound he wash’d, the styptic juice infused.The
closing flesh that instant ceased to glow,The wound to torture, and the blood to
flow.[Illustration: ] HERCULESBOOK XII.ARGUMENT.THE BATTLE AT THE GRECIAN
WALL.The Greeks having retired into their intrenchments, Hector attempts toforce
them; but it proving impossible to pass the ditch, Polydamasadvises to quit
their chariots, and manage the attack on foot. TheTrojans follow his counsel;
and having divided their army into fivebodies of foot, begin the assault. But
upon the signal of an eagle witha serpent in his talons, which appeared on the
left hand of theTrojans, Polydamas endeavours to withdraw them again. This
Hectoropposes, and continues the attack; in which, after many actions,Sarpedon
makes the first breach in the wall. Hector also, casting astone of vast size,
forces open one of the gates, and enters at thehead of his troops, who
victoriously pursue the Grecians even to theirships.While thus the hero’s pious
cares attendThe cure and safety of his wounded friend,Trojans and Greeks with
clashing shields engage,And mutual deaths are dealt with mutual rage.Nor long
the trench or lofty walls oppose;With gods averse the ill-fated works
arose;Their powers neglected, and no victim slain,The walls were raised, the
trenches sunk in vain.Without the gods, how short a period standsThe proudest
monument of mortal hands!This stood while Hector and Achilles raged,While sacred
Troy the warring hosts engaged;But when her sons were slain, her city burn’d,And
what survived of Greece to Greece return’d;Then Neptune and Apollo shook the
shore,Then Ida’s summits pour’d their watery store;Rhesus and Rhodius then unite
their rills,Caresus roaring down the stony hills,Æsepus, Granicus, with mingled
force,And Xanthus foaming from his fruitful source;And gulfy Simois, rolling to
the main[224]Helmets, and shields, and godlike heroes slain:These, turn’d by
Phœbus from their wonted ways,Deluged the rampire nine continual days;The weight
of waters saps the yielding wall,And to the sea the floating bulwarks
fall.Incessant cataracts the Thunderer pours,And half the skies descend in
sluicy showers.The god of ocean, marching stern before,With his huge trident
wounds the trembling shore,Vast stones and piles from their foundation
heaves,And whelms the smoky ruin in the waves.Now smooth’d with sand, and
levell’d by the flood,No fragment tells where once the wonder stood;In their old
bounds the rivers roll again,Shine ’twixt the hills, or wander o’er the
plain.[225]But this the gods in later times perform;As yet the bulwark stood,
and braved the storm;The strokes yet echoed of contending powers;War thunder’d
at the gates, and blood distain’d the towers.Smote by the arm of Jove with dire
dismay,Close by their hollow ships the Grecians lay:Hector’s approach in every
wind they hear,And Hector’s fury every moment fear.He, like a whirlwind, toss’d
the scattering throng,Mingled the troops, and drove the field along.So ’midst
the dogs and hunters’ daring bands,Fierce of his might, a boar or lion
stands;Arm’d foes around a dreadful circle form,And hissing javelins rain an
iron storm:His powers untamed, their bold assault defy,And where he turns the
rout disperse or die:He foams, he glares, he bounds against them all,And if he
falls, his courage makes him fall.With equal rage encompass’d Hector
glows;Exhorts his armies, and the trenches shows.The panting steeds impatient
fury breathe,And snort and tremble at the gulf beneath;Just at the brink they
neigh, and paw the ground,And the turf trembles, and the skies resound.Eager
they view’d the prospect dark and deep,Vast was the leap, and headlong hung the
steep;The bottom bare, (a formidable show!)And bristled thick with sharpen’d
stakes below.The foot alone this strong defence could force,And try the pass
impervious to the horse.This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave,Restrain’d great
Hector, and this counsel gave:“O thou, bold leader of the Trojan bands!And you,
confederate chiefs from foreign lands!What entrance here can cumbrous chariots
find,The stakes beneath, the Grecian walls behind?No pass through those, without
a thousand wounds,No space for combat in yon narrow bounds.Proud of the favours
mighty Jove has shown,On certain dangers we too rashly run:If ’tis his will our
haughty foes to tame,Oh may this instant end the Grecian name!Here, far from
Argos, let their heroes fall,And one great day destroy and bury all!But should
they turn, and here oppress our train,What hopes, what methods of retreat
remain?Wedged in the trench, by our own troops confused,In one promiscuous
carnage crush’d and bruised,All Troy must perish, if their arms prevail,Nor
shall a Trojan live to tell the tale.Hear then, ye warriors! and obey with
speed;Back from the trenches let your steeds be led;Then all alighting, wedged
in firm array,Proceed on foot, and Hector lead the way.So Greece shall stoop
before our conquering power,And this (if Jove consent) her fatal
hour.”[Illustration: ] POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTORThis counsel pleased: the
godlike Hector sprungSwift from his seat; his clanging armour rung.The chief’s
example follow’d by his train,Each quits his car, and issues on the plain,By
orders strict the charioteers enjoin’dCompel the coursers to their ranks
behind.The forces part in five distinguish’d bands,And all obey their several
chiefs’ commands.The best and bravest in the first conspire,Pant for the fight,
and threat the fleet with fire:Great Hector glorious in the van of
these,Polydamas, and brave Cebriones.Before the next the graceful Paris
shines,And bold Alcathous, and Agenor joins.The sons of Priam with the third
appear,Deiphobus, and Helenas the seer;In arms with these the mighty Asius
stood,Who drew from Hyrtacus his noble blood,And whom Arisba’s yellow coursers
bore,The coursers fed on Sellè’s winding shore.Antenor’s sons the fourth
battalion guide,And great Æneas, born on fountful Ide.Divine Sarpedon the last
band obey’d,Whom Glaucus and Asteropaeus aid.Next him, the bravest, at their
army’s head,But he more brave than all the hosts he led.Now with compacted
shields in close array,The moving legions speed their headlong way:Already in
their hopes they fire the fleet,And see the Grecians gasping at their feet.While
every Trojan thus, and every aid,The advice of wise Polydamas obey’d,Asius
alone, confiding in his car,His vaunted coursers urged to meet the war.Unhappy
hero! and advised in vain;Those wheels returning ne’er shall mark the plain;No
more those coursers with triumphant joyRestore their master to the gates of
Troy!Black death attends behind the Grecian wall,And great Idomeneus shall boast
thy fall!Fierce to the left he drives, where from the plainThe flying Grecians
strove their ships to gain;Swift through the wall their horse and chariots
pass’d,The gates half-open’d to receive the last.Thither, exulting in his force,
he flies:His following host with clamours rend the skies:To plunge the Grecians
headlong in the main,Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain!To
guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend,Who from the Lapiths’ warlike race
descend;This Polypœtes, great Perithous’ heir,And that Leonteus, like the god of
war.As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise;Their roots in earth, their
heads amidst the skies:Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crown’d,Forbid
the tempest, and protect the ground;High on the hills appears their stately
form,And their deep roots for ever brave the storm.So graceful these, and so the
shock they standOf raging Asius, and his furious band.Orestes, Acamas, in front
appear,And Œnomaus and Thoon close the rear:In vain their clamours shake the
ambient fields,In vain around them beat their hollow shields;The fearless
brothers on the Grecians call,To guard their navies, and defend the wall.Even
when they saw Troy’s sable troops impend,And Greece tumultuous from her towers
descend,Forth from the portals rush’d the intrepid pair,Opposed their breasts,
and stood themselves the war.So two wild boars spring furious from their
den,Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men;On every side the crackling
trees they tear,And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare;They gnash their
tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll,Till some wide wound lets out their mighty
soul.Around their heads the whistling javelins sung,With sounding strokes their
brazen targets rung;Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powersMaintain’d
the walls, and mann’d the lofty towers:To save their fleet their last efforts
they try,And stones and darts in mingled tempests fly.As when sharp Boreas blows
abroad, and bringsThe dreary winter on his frozen wings;Beneath the low-hung
clouds the sheets of snowDescend, and whiten all the fields below:So fast the
darts on either army pour,So down the rampires rolls the rocky shower:Heavy, and
thick, resound the batter’d shields,And the deaf echo rattles round the
fields.With shame repulsed, with grief and fury driven,The frantic Asius thus
accuses Heaven:“In powers immortal who shall now believe?Can those too flatter,
and can Jove deceive?What man could doubt but Troy’s victorious powerShould
humble Greece, and this her fatal hour?But like when wasps from hollow crannies
drive,To guard the entrance of their common hive,Darkening the rock, while with
unwearied wingsThey strike the assailants, and infix their stings;A race
determined, that to death contend:So fierce these Greeks their last retreats
defend.Gods! shall two warriors only guard their gates,Repel an army, and
defraud the fates?”These empty accents mingled with the wind,Nor moved great
Jove’s unalterable mind;To godlike Hector and his matchless mightWas owed the
glory of the destined fight.Like deeds of arms through all the forts were
tried,And all the gates sustain’d an equal tide;Through the long walls the stony
showers were heard,The blaze of flames, the flash of arms appear’d.The spirit of
a god my breast inspire,To raise each act to life, and sing with fire!While
Greece unconquer’d kept alive the war,Secure of death, confiding in despair;And
all her guardian gods, in deep dismay,With unassisting arms deplored the
day.Even yet the dauntless Lapithae maintainThe dreadful pass, and round them
heap the slain.First Damasus, by Polypœtes’ steel,Pierced through his helmet’s
brazen visor, fell;The weapon drank the mingled brains and gore!The warrior
sinks, tremendous now no more!Next Ormenus and Pylon yield their breath:Nor less
Leonteus strews the field with death;First through the belt Hippomachus he
gored,Then sudden waved his unresisted sword:Antiphates, as through the ranks he
broke,The falchion struck, and fate pursued the stroke:Iamenus, Orestes, Menon,
bled;And round him rose a monument of dead.Meantime, the bravest of the Trojan
crew,Bold Hector and Polydamas, pursue;Fierce with impatience on the works to
fall,And wrap in rolling flames the fleet and wall.These on the farther bank now
stood and gazed,By Heaven alarm’d, by prodigies amazed:A signal omen stopp’d the
passing host,Their martial fury in their wonder lost.Jove’s bird on sounding
pinions beat the skies;A bleeding serpent of enormous size,His talons truss’d;
alive, and curling round,He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound:Mad
with the smart, he drops the fatal prey,In airy circles wings his painful
way,Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries:Amidst the host the
fallen serpent lies.They, pale with terror, mark its spires unroll’d,And Jove’s
portent with beating hearts behold.Then first Polydamas the silence broke,Long
weigh’d the signal, and to Hector spoke:“How oft, my brother, thy reproach I
bear,For words well meant, and sentiments sincere?True to those counsels which I
judge the best,I tell the faithful dictates of my breast.To speak his thoughts
is every freeman’s right,In peace, in war, in council, and in fight;And all I
move, deferring to thy sway,But tends to raise that power which I obey.Then hear
my words, nor may my words be vain!Seek not this day the Grecian ships to
gain;For sure, to warn us, Jove his omen sent,And thus my mind explains its
clear event:The victor eagle, whose sinister flightRetards our host, and fills
our hearts with fright,Dismiss’d his conquest in the middle skies,Allow’d to
seize, but not possess the prize;Thus, though we gird with fires the Grecian
fleet,Though these proud bulwalks tumble at our feet,Toils unforeseen, and
fiercer, are decreed;More woes shall follow, and more heroes bleed.So bodes my
soul, and bids me thus advise;For thus a skilful seer would read the skies.”To
him then Hector with disdain return’d:(Fierce as he spoke, his eyes with fury
burn’d:)“Are these the faithful counsels of thy tongue?Thy will is partial, not
thy reason wrong:Or if the purpose of thy heart thou vent,Sure heaven resumes
the little sense it lent.What coward counsels would thy madness moveAgainst the
word, the will reveal’d of Jove?The leading sign, the irrevocable nod,And happy
thunders of the favouring god,These shall I slight, and guide my wavering mindBy
wandering birds that flit with every wind?Ye vagrants of the sky! your wings
extend,Or where the suns arise, or where descend;To right, to left, unheeded
take your way,While I the dictates of high heaven obey.Without a sign his sword
the brave man draws,And asks no omen but his country’s cause.But why should’st
thou suspect the war’s success?None fears it more, as none promotes it
less:Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire,Trust thy own cowardice to
escape their fire.Troy and her sons may find a general grave,But thou canst
live, for thou canst be a slave.Yet should the fears that wary mind
suggestsSpread their cold poison through our soldiers’ breasts,My javelin can
revenge so base a part,And free the soul that quivers in thy heart.”Furious he
spoke, and, rushing to the wall,Calls on his host; his host obey the call;With
ardour follow where their leader flies:Redoubling clamours thunder in the
skies.Jove breathes a whirlwind from the hills of Ide,And drifts of dust the
clouded navy hide;He fills the Greeks with terror and dismay,And gives great
Hector the predestined day.Strong in themselves, but stronger in his aid,Close
to the works their rigid siege they laid.In vain the mounds and massy beams
defend,While these they undermine, and those they rend;Upheaved the piles that
prop the solid wall;And heaps on heaps the smoky ruins fall.Greece on her
ramparts stands the fierce alarms;The crowded bulwarks blaze with waving
arms,Shield touching shield, a long refulgent row;Whence hissing darts,
incessant, rain below.The bold Ajaces fly from tower to tower,And rouse, with
flame divine, the Grecian power.The generous impulse every Greek obeys;Threats
urge the fearful; and the valiant, praise.“Fellows in arms! whose deeds are
known to fame,And you, whose ardour hopes an equal name!Since not alike endued
with force or art;Behold a day when each may act his part!A day to fire the
brave, and warm the cold,To gain new glories, or augment the old.Urge those who
stand, and those who faint, excite;Drown Hector’s vaunts in loud exhorts of
fight;Conquest, not safety, fill the thoughts of all;Seek not your fleet, but
sally from the wall;So Jove once more may drive their routed train,And Troy lie
trembling in her walls again.”Their ardour kindles all the Grecian powers;And
now the stones descend in heavier showers.As when high Jove his sharp artillery
forms,And opes his cloudy magazine of storms;In winter’s bleak uncomfortable
reign,A snowy inundation hides the plain;He stills the winds, and bids the skies
to sleep;Then pours the silent tempest thick and deep;And first the
mountain-tops are cover’d o’er,Then the green fields, and then the sandy
shore;Bent with the weight, the nodding woods are seen,And one bright waste
hides all the works of men:The circling seas, alone absorbing all,Drink the
dissolving fleeces as they fall:So from each side increased the stony rain,And
the white ruin rises o’er the plain.Thus godlike Hector and his troops contendTo
force the ramparts, and the gates to rend:Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks
would yield,Till great Sarpedon tower’d amid the field;For mighty Jove inspired
with martial flameHis matchless son, and urged him on to fame.In arms he shines,
conspicuous from afar,And bears aloft his ample shield in air;Within whose orb
the thick bull-hides were roll’d,Ponderous with brass, and bound with ductile
gold:And while two pointed javelins arm his hands,Majestic moves along, and
leads his Lycian bands.So press’d with hunger, from the mountain’s browDescends
a lion on the flocks below;So stalks the lordly savage o’er the plain,In sullen
majesty, and stern disdain:In vain loud mastiffs bay him from afar,And shepherds
gall him with an iron war;Regardless, furious, he pursues his way;He foams, he
roars, he rends the panting prey.Resolved alike, divine Sarpedon glowsWith
generous rage that drives him on the foes.He views the towers, and meditates
their fall,To sure destruction dooms the aspiring wall;Then casting on his
friend an ardent look,Fired with the thirst of glory, thus he spoke:“Why boast
we, Glaucus! our extended reign,[226]Where Xanthus’ streams enrich the Lycian
plain,Our numerous herds that range the fruitful field,And hills where vines
their purple harvest yield,Our foaming bowls with purer nectar crown’d,Our
feasts enhanced with music’s sprightly sound?Why on those shores are we with joy
survey’d,Admired as heroes, and as gods obey’d,Unless great acts superior merit
prove,And vindicate the bounteous powers above?’Tis ours, the dignity they give
to grace;The first in valour, as the first in place;That when with wondering
eyes our martial bandsBehold our deeds transcending our commands,Such, they may
cry, deserve the sovereign state,Whom those that envy dare not imitate!Could all
our care elude the gloomy grave,Which claims no less the fearful and the
brave,For lust of fame I should not vainly dareIn fighting fields, nor urge thy
soul to war.But since, alas! ignoble age must come,Disease, and death’s
inexorable doom,The life, which others pay, let us bestow,And give to fame what
we to nature owe;Brave though we fall, and honour’d if we live,Or let us glory
gain, or glory give!”He said; his words the listening chief inspireWith equal
warmth, and rouse the warrior’s fire;The troops pursue their leaders with
delight,Rush to the foe, and claim the promised fight.Menestheus from on high
the storm beheldThreatening the fort, and blackening in the field:Around the
walls he gazed, to view from farWhat aid appear’d to avert the approaching
war,And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood,Of fight insatiate, prodigal of
blood.In vain he calls; the din of helms and shieldsRings to the skies, and
echoes through the fields,The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound,Heaven
trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground.Then thus to Thoos: “Hence
with speed (he said),And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid;Their strength, united,
best may help to bearThe bloody labours of the doubtful war:Hither the Lycian
princes bend their course,The best and bravest of the hostile force.But if too
fiercely there the foes contend,Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend,And
Teucer haste with his unerring bowTo share the danger, and repel the foe.”Swift,
at the word, the herald speeds alongThe lofty ramparts, through the martial
throng,And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore,Opposed in combat on the
dusty shore.“Ye valiant leaders of our warlike bands!Your aid (said Thoos)
Peteus’ son demands;Your strength, united, best may help to bearThe bloody
labours of the doubtful war:Thither the Lycian princes bend their course,The
best and bravest of the hostile force.But if too fiercely, here, the foes
contend,At least, let Telamon those towers defend,And Teucer haste with his
unerring bowTo share the danger, and repel the foe.”Straight to the fort great
Ajax turn’d his care,And thus bespoke his brothers of the war:“Now, valiant
Lycomede! exert your might,And, brave Oïleus, prove your force in fight;To you I
trust the fortune of the field,Till by this arm the foe shall be repell’d:That
done, expect me to complete the day.Then with his sevenfold shield he strode
away.”With equal steps bold Teucer press’d the shore,Whose fatal bow the strong
Pandion bore.High on the walls appear’d the Lycian powers,Like some black
tempest gathering round the towers:The Greeks, oppress’d, their utmost force
unite,Prepared to labour in the unequal fight:The war renews, mix’d shouts and
groans arise;Tumultuous clamour mounts, and thickens in the skies.Fierce Ajax
first the advancing host invades,And sends the brave Epicles to the
shades,Sarpedon’s friend. Across the warrior’s way,Rent from the walls, a rocky
fragment lay;In modern ages not the strongest swainCould heave the unwieldy
burden from the plain:He poised, and swung it round; then toss’d on high,It flew
with force, and labour’d up the sky;Full on the Lycian’s helmet thundering
down,The ponderous ruin crush’d his batter’d crown.As skilful divers from some
airy steepHeadlong descend, and shoot into the deep,So falls Epicles; then in
groans expires,And murmuring to the shades the soul retires.While to the
ramparts daring Glaucus drew,From Teucer’s hand a winged arrow flew;The bearded
shaft the destined passage found,And on his naked arm inflicts a wound.The
chief, who fear’d some foe’s insulting boastMight stop the progress of his
warlike host,Conceal’d the wound, and, leaping from his heightRetired reluctant
from the unfinish’d fight.Divine Sarpedon with regret beheldDisabled Glaucus
slowly quit the field;His beating breast with generous ardour glows,He springs
to fight, and flies upon the foes.Alcmaon first was doom’d his force to
feel;Deep in his breast he plunged the pointed steel;Then from the yawning wound
with fury toreThe spear, pursued by gushing streams of gore:Down sinks the
warrior with a thundering sound,His brazen armour rings against the ground.Swift
to the battlement the victor flies,Tugs with full force, and every nerve
applies:It shakes; the ponderous stones disjointed yield;The rolling ruins smoke
along the field.A mighty breach appears; the walls lie bare;And, like a deluge,
rushes in the war.At once bold Teucer draws the twanging bow,And Ajax sends his
javelin at the foe;Fix’d in his belt the feather’d weapon stood,And through his
buckler drove the trembling wood;But Jove was present in the dire debate,To
shield his offspring, and avert his fate.The prince gave back, not meditating
flight,But urging vengeance, and severer fight;Then raised with hope, and fired
with glory’s charms,His fainting squadrons to new fury warms.“O where, ye
Lycians, is the strength you boast?Your former fame and ancient virtue lost!The
breach lies open, but your chief in vainAttempts alone the guarded pass to
gain:Unite, and soon that hostile fleet shall fall:The force of powerful union
conquers all.”This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew;They join, they thicken,
and the assault renew:Unmoved the embodied Greeks their fury dare,And fix’d
support the weight of all the war;Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian
powers,Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers.As on the confines of
adjoining grounds,Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds;They tug,
they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,One foot, one inch, of the contended
field;Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall;Nor these can keep, nor
those can win the wall.Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound,Loud
strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound;The copious slaughter covers all
the shore,And the high ramparts drip with human gore.As when two scales are
charged with doubtful loads,From side to side the trembling balance nods,(While
some laborious matron, just and poor,With nice exactness weighs her woolly
store,)Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspendsEach equal weight; nor this,
nor that, descends:[227]So stood the war, till Hector’s matchless might,With
fates prevailing, turn’d the scale of fight.Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls
he flies,And fires his host with loud repeated cries.“Advance, ye Trojans! lend
your valiant hands,Haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!”They hear,
they run; and, gathering at his call,Raise scaling engines, and ascend the
wall:Around the works a wood of glittering spearsShoots up, and all the rising
host appears.A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw,Pointed above, and
rough and gross below:Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,Such
men as live in these degenerate days:Yet this, as easy as a swain could bearThe
snowy fleece, he toss’d, and shook in air;For Jove upheld, and lighten’d of its
loadThe unwieldy rock, the labour of a god.Thus arm’d, before the folded gates
he came,Of massy substance, and stupendous frame;With iron bars and brazen
hinges strong,On lofty beams of solid timber hung:Then thundering through the
planks with forceful sway,Drives the sharp rock; the solid beams give way,The
folds are shatter’d; from the crackling doorLeap the resounding bars, the flying
hinges roar.Now rushing in, the furious chief appears,Gloomy as night![228] and
shakes two shining spears:A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came,And from
his eye-balls flash’d the living flame.He moves a god, resistless in his
course,And seems a match for more than mortal force.Then pouring after, through
the gaping space,A tide of Trojans flows, and fills the place;The Greeks behold,
they tremble, and they fly;The shore is heap’d with death, and tumult rends the
sky.[Illustration: ] GREEK ALTARBOOK XIII.ARGUMENT.THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED,
IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS: THEACTS OF IDOMENEUS.Neptune, concerned for
the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing thefortification forced by Hector, (who
had entered the gate near thestation of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of
Calchas, and inspiresthose heroes to oppose him: then, in the form of one of the
generals,encourages the other Greeks who had retired to their vessels. TheAjaces
form their troops in a close phalanx, and put a stop to Hectorand the Trojans.
Several deeds of valour are performed; Meriones,losing his spear in the
encounter, repairs to seek another at the tentof Idomeneus: this occasions a
conversation between those two warriors,who return together to the battle.
Idomeneus signalizes his courageabove the rest; he kills Othryoneus, Asius, and
Alcathous: Deiphobusand Æneas march against him, and at length Idomeneus
retires. Menelauswounds Helenus, and kills Pisander. The Trojans are repulsed on
theleft wing; Hector still keeps his ground against the Ajaces, till,being
galled by the Locrian slingers and archers, Polydamas advises tocall a council
of war: Hector approves of his advice, but goes first torally the Trojans;
upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax again,and renews the attack. The
eight-and-twentieth day still continues. The scene is between the Grecian wall
and the sea-shore.When now the Thunderer on the sea-beat coastHad fix’d great
Hector and his conquering host,He left them to the fates, in bloody frayTo toil
and struggle through the well-fought day.Then turn’d to Thracia from the field
of fightThose eyes that shed insufferable light,To where the Mysians prove their
martial force,And hardy Thracians tame the savage horse;And where the far-famed
Hippomolgian strays,Renown’d for justice and for length of days;[229]Thrice
happy race! that, innocent of blood,From milk, innoxious, seek their simple
food:Jove sees delighted; and avoids the sceneOf guilty Troy, of arms, and dying
men:No aid, he deems, to either host is given,While his high law suspends the
powers of Heaven.Meantime the monarch of the watery mainObserved the Thunderer,
nor observed in vain.In Samothracia, on a mountain’s brow,Whose waving woods
o’erhung the deeps below,He sat; and round him cast his azure eyesWhere Ida’s
misty tops confusedly rise;Below, fair Ilion’s glittering spires were seen;The
crowded ships and sable seas between.There, from the crystal chambers of the
mainEmerged, he sat, and mourn’d his Argives slain.At Jove incensed, with grief
and fury stung,Prone down the rocky steep he rush’d along;Fierce as he pass’d,
the lofty mountains nod,The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod,And felt
the footsteps of the immortal god.From realm to realm three ample strides he
took,And, at the fourth, the distant Ægae shook.Far in the bay his shining
palace stands,Eternal frame! not raised by mortal hands:This having reach’d, his
brass-hoof’d steeds he reins,Fleet as the winds, and deck’d with golden
manes.Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold,Immortal arms of adamant and
gold.He mounts the car, the golden scourge applies,He sits superior, and the
chariot flies:His whirling wheels the glassy surface sweep;The enormous monsters
rolling o’er the deepGambol around him on the watery way,And heavy whales in
awkward measures play;The sea subsiding spreads a level plain,Exults, and owns
the monarch of the main;The parting waves before his coursers fly;The wondering
waters leave his axle dry.Deep in the liquid regions lies a cave,Between where
Tenedos the surges lave,And rocky Imbrus breaks the rolling wave:There the great
ruler of the azure roundStopp’d his swift chariot, and his steeds unbound,Fed
with ambrosial herbage from his hand,And link’d their fetlocks with a golden
band,Infrangible, immortal: there they stay:The father of the floods pursues his
way:Where, like a tempest, darkening heaven around,Or fiery deluge that devours
the ground,The impatient Trojans, in a gloomy throng,Embattled roll’d, as Hector
rush’d along:To the loud tumult and the barbarous cryThe heavens re-echo, and
the shores reply:They vow destruction to the Grecian name,And in their hopes the
fleets already flame.But Neptune, rising from the seas profound,The god whose
earthquakes rock the solid ground,Now wears a mortal form; like Calchas
seen,Such his loud voice, and such his manly mien;His shouts incessant every
Greek inspire,But most the Ajaces, adding fire to fire.[Illustration: ] NEPTUNE
RISING FROM THE SEA“’Tis yours, O warriors, all our hopes to raise:Oh recollect
your ancient worth and praise!’Tis yours to save us, if you cease to
fear;Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here.On other works though Troy
with fury fall,And pour her armies o’er our batter’d wall:There Greece has
strength: but this, this part o’erthrown,Her strength were vain; I dread for you
alone:Here Hector rages like the force of fire,Vaunts of his gods, and calls
high Jove his sire:If yet some heavenly power your breast excite,Breathe in your
hearts, and string your arms to fight,Greece yet may live, her threaten’d fleet
maintain:And Hector’s force, and Jove’s own aid, be vain.”Then with his sceptre,
that the deep controls,He touch’d the chiefs, and steel’d their manly
souls:Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts,Prompts their light
limbs, and swells their daring hearts.Then, as a falcon from the rocky
height,Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight,Forth-springing instant, darts
herself from high,Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky:Such, and so
swift, the power of ocean flew;The wide horizon shut him from their view.The
inspiring god Oïleus’ active sonPerceived the first, and thus to Telamon:“Some
god, my friend, some god in human formFavouring descends, and wills to stand the
storm.Not Calchas this, the venerable seer;Short as he turned, I saw the power
appear:I mark’d his parting, and the steps he trod;His own bright evidence
reveals a god.Even now some energy divine I share,And seem to walk on wings, and
tread in air!”“With equal ardour (Telamon returns)My soul is kindled, and my
bosom burns;New rising spirits all my force alarm,Lift each impatient limb, and
brace my arm.This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart;The blood pours back,
and fortifies my heart:Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet,And stretch
the dreadful Hector at my feet.”Full of the god that urged their burning
breast,The heroes thus their mutual warmth express’d.Neptune meanwhile the
routed Greeks inspired;Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired,Pant
in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls,And swarms victorious o’er their
yielding walls:Trembling before the impending storm they lie,While tears of rage
stand burning in their eye.Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal
hour;But breathe new courage as they feel the power.Teucer and Leitus first his
words excite;Then stern Peneleus rises to the fight;Thoas, Deipyrus, in arms
renown’d,And Merion next, the impulsive fury found;Last Nestor’s son the same
bold ardour takes,While thus the god the martial fire awakes:“Oh lasting infamy,
oh dire disgraceTo chiefs of vigorous youth, and manly race!I trusted in the
gods, and you, to seeBrave Greece victorious, and her navy free:Ah, no—the
glorious combat you disclaim,And one black day clouds all her former
fame.Heavens! what a prodigy these eyes survey,Unseen, unthought, till this
amazing day!Fly we at length from Troy’s oft-conquer’d bands?And falls our fleet
by such inglorious hands?A rout undisciplined, a straggling train,Not born to
glories of the dusty plain;Like frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued,A prey
to every savage of the wood:Shall these, so late who trembled at your
name,Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame?A change so shameful, say,
what cause has wrought?The soldiers’ baseness, or the general’s fault?Fools!
will ye perish for your leader’s vice;The purchase infamy, and life the
price?’Tis not your cause, Achilles’ injured fame:Another’s is the crime, but
yours the shame.Grant that our chief offend through rage or lust,Must you be
cowards, if your king’s unjust?Prevent this evil, and your country save:Small
thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.Think, and subdue! on dastards dead
to fameI waste no anger, for they feel no shame:But you, the pride, the flower
of all our host,My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost!Nor deem this day,
this battle, all you lose;A day more black, a fate more vile, ensues.Let each
reflect, who prizes fame or breath,On endless infamy, on instant death:For, lo!
the fated time, the appointed shore:Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers
roar!Impetuous Hector thunders at the wall;The hour, the spot, to conquer, or to
fall.”These words the Grecians’ fainting hearts inspire,And listening armies
catch the godlike fire.Fix’d at his post was each bold Ajax found,With
well-ranged squadrons strongly circled round:So close their order, so disposed
their fight,As Pallas’ self might view with fix’d delight;Or had the god of war
inclined his eyes,The god of war had own’d a just surprise.A chosen phalanx,
firm, resolved as fate,Descending Hector and his battle wait.An iron scene
gleams dreadful o’er the fields,Armour in armour lock’d, and shields in
shields,Spears lean on spears, on targets targets throng,Helms stuck to helms,
and man drove man along.The floating plumes unnumber’d wave above,As when an
earthquake stirs the nodding grove;And levell’d at the skies with pointing
rays,Their brandish’d lances at each motion blaze.Thus breathing death, in
terrible array,The close compacted legions urged their way:Fierce they drove on,
impatient to destroy;Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.As from
some mountain’s craggy forehead torn,A rock’s round fragment flies, with fury
borne,(Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends,)Precipitate the ponderous
mass descends:From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds;At every shock the
crackling wood resounds;Still gathering force, it smokes; and urged
amain,Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain:There stops—so
Hector. Their whole force he proved,[230]Resistless when he raged, and, when he
stopp’d, unmoved.On him the war is bent, the darts are shed,And all their
falchions wave around his head:Repulsed he stands, nor from his stand
retires;But with repeated shouts his army fires.“Trojans! be firm; this arm
shall make your wayThrough yon square body, and that black array:Stand, and my
spear shall rout their scattering power,Strong as they seem, embattled like a
tower;For he that Juno’s heavenly bosom warms,The first of gods, this day
inspires our arms.”He said; and roused the soul in every breast:Urged with
desire of fame, beyond the rest,Forth march’d Deiphobus; but, marching,
heldBefore his wary steps his ample shield.Bold Merion aim’d a stroke (nor aim’d
it wide);The glittering javelin pierced the tough bull-hide;But pierced not
through: unfaithful to his hand,The point broke short, and sparkled in the
sand.The Trojan warrior, touch’d with timely fear,On the raised orb to distance
bore the spear.The Greek, retreating, mourn’d his frustrate blow,And cursed the
treacherous lance that spared a foe;Then to the ships with surly speed he
went,To seek a surer javelin in his tent.Meanwhile with rising rage the battle
glows,The tumult thickens, and the clamour grows.By Teucer’s arm the warlike
Imbrius bleeds,The son of Mentor, rich in generous steeds.Ere yet to Troy the
sons of Greece were led,In fair Pedaeus’ verdant pastures bred,The youth had
dwelt, remote from war’s alarms,And blest in bright Medesicaste’s arms:(This
nymph, the fruit of Priam’s ravish’d joy,Allied the warrior to the house of
Troy:)To Troy, when glory call’d his arms, he came,And match’d the bravest of
her chiefs in fame:With Priam’s sons, a guardian of the throne,He lived, beloved
and honour’d as his own.Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear:He groans
beneath the Telamonian spear.As from some far-seen mountain’s airy crown,Subdued
by steel, a tall ash tumbles down,And soils its verdant tresses on the ground;So
falls the youth; his arms the fall resound.Then Teucer rushing to despoil the
dead,From Hector’s hand a shining javelin fled:He saw, and shunn’d the death;
the forceful dartSung on, and pierced Amphimachus’s heart,Cteatus’ son, of
Neptune’s forceful line;Vain was his courage, and his race divine!Prostrate he
falls; his clanging arms resound,And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.To
seize his beamy helm the victor flies,And just had fastened on the dazzling
prize,When Ajax’ manly arm a javelin flung;Full on the shield’s round boss the
weapon rung;He felt the shock, nor more was doom’d to feel,Secure in mail, and
sheath’d in shining steel.Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtainThe spoils
contested, and bear off the slain.Between the leaders of the Athenian
line,(Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)Deplored Amphimachus, sad
object! lies;Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces’ prize.As two grim lions bear
across the lawn,Snatch’d from devouring hounds, a slaughter’d fawn.In their fell
jaws high-lifting through the wood,And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of
blood;So these, the chief: great Ajax from the deadStrips his bright arms;
Oïleus lops his head:Toss’d like a ball, and whirl’d in air away,At Hector’s
feet the gory visage lay.The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain,And pierced
with sorrow for his grandson slain,Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their
hands,And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.Swift as a whirlwind rushing
to the fleet,He finds the lance-famed Idomen of Crete,His pensive brow the
generous care express’dWith which a wounded soldier touch’d his breast,Whom in
the chance of war a javelin tore,And his sad comrades from the battle bore;Him
to the surgeons of the camp he sent:That office paid, he issued from his
tentFierce for the fight: to whom the god begun,In Thoas’ voice, Andræmon’s
valiant son,Who ruled where Calydon’s white rocks arise,And Pleuron’s chalky
cliffs emblaze the skies:“Where’s now the imperious vaunt, the daring boast,Of
Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?”To whom the king: “On Greece no blame
be thrown;Arms are her trade, and war is all her own.Her hardy heroes from the
well-fought plainsNor fear withholds, nor shameful sloth detains:’Tis heaven,
alas! and Jove’s all-powerful doom,That far, far distant from our native
homeWills us to fall inglorious! Oh, my friend!Once foremost in the fight, still
prone to lendOr arms or counsels, now perform thy best,And what thou canst not
singly, urge the rest.”Thus he: and thus the god whose force can makeThe solid
globe’s eternal basis shake:“Ah! never may he see his native land,But feed the
vultures on this hateful strand,Who seeks ignobly in his ships to stay,Nor dares
to combat on this signal day!For this, behold! in horrid arms I shine,And urge
thy soul to rival acts with mine.Together let us battle on the plain;Two, not
the worst; nor even this succour vain:Not vain the weakest, if their force
unite;But ours, the bravest have confess’d in fight.”This said, he rushes where
the combat burns;Swift to his tent the Cretan king returns:From thence, two
javelins glittering in his hand,And clad in arms that lighten’d all the
strand,Fierce on the foe the impetuous hero drove,Like lightning bursting from
the arm of Jove,Which to pale man the wrath of heaven declares,Or terrifies the
offending world with wars;In streamy sparkles, kindling all the skies,From pole
to pole the trail of glory flies:Thus his bright armour o’er the dazzled
throngGleam’d dreadful, as the monarch flash’d along.Him, near his tent,
Meriones attends;Whom thus he questions: “Ever best of friends!O say, in every
art of battle skill’d,What holds thy courage from so brave a field?On some
important message art thou bound,Or bleeds my friend by some unhappy
wound?Inglorious here, my soul abhors to stay,And glows with prospects of th’
approaching day.”“O prince! (Meriones replies) whose careLeads forth the
embattled sons of Crete to war;This speaks my grief: this headless lance I
wield;The rest lies rooted in a Trojan shield.”To whom the Cretan: “Enter, and
receiveThe wonted weapons; those my tent can give;Spears I have store, (and
Trojan lances all,)That shed a lustre round the illumined wall,Though I,
disdainful of the distant war,Nor trust the dart, nor aim the uncertain
spear,Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain;And thence these trophies,
and these arms I gain.Enter, and see on heaps the helmets roll’d,And high-hung
spears, and shields that flame with gold.”“Nor vain (said Merion) are our
martial toils;We too can boast of no ignoble spoils:But those my ship contains;
whence distant far,I fight conspicuous in the van of war,What need I more? If
any Greek there beWho knows not Merion, I appeal to thee.”To this, Idomeneus:
“The fields of fightHave proved thy valour, and unconquer’d might:And were some
ambush for the foes design’d,Even there thy courage would not lag behind:In that
sharp service, singled from the rest,The fear of each, or valour, stands
confess’d.No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows;He shifts his place: his
colour comes and goes:A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part;Against his
bosom beats his quivering heart;Terror and death in his wild eye-balls
stare;With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair,And looks a bloodless
image of despair!Not so the brave—still dauntless, still the same,Unchanged his
colour, and unmoved his frame:Composed his thought, determined is his eye,And
fix’d his soul, to conquer or to die:If aught disturb the tenour of his
breast,’Tis but the wish to strike before the rest.“In such assays thy blameless
worth is known,And every art of dangerous war thy own.By chance of fight
whatever wounds you bore,Those wounds were glorious all, and all before;Such as
may teach, ’twas still thy brave delightT’oppose thy bosom where thy foremost
fight.But why, like infants, cold to honour’s charms,Stand we to talk, when
glory calls to arms?Go—from my conquer’d spears the choicest take,And to their
owners send them nobly back.”Swift at the word bold Merion snatch’d a spearAnd,
breathing slaughter, follow’d to the war.So Mars armipotent invades the
plain,(The wide destroyer of the race of man,)Terror, his best-beloved son,
attends his course,Arm’d with stern boldness, and enormous force;The pride of
haughty warriors to confound,And lay the strength of tyrants on the ground:From
Thrace they fly, call’d to the dire alarmsOf warring Phlegyans, and Ephyrian
arms;Invoked by both, relentless they dispose,To these glad conquest, murderous
rout to those.So march’d the leaders of the Cretan train,And their bright arms
shot horror o’er the plain.Then first spake Merion: “Shall we join the right,Or
combat in the centre of the fight?Or to the left our wonted succour lend?Hazard
and fame all parts alike attend.”“Not in the centre (Idomen replied:)Our ablest
chieftains the main battle guide;Each godlike Ajax makes that post his care,And
gallant Teucer deals destruction there,Skill’d or with shafts to gall the
distant field,Or bear close battle on the sounding shield.These can the rage of
haughty Hector tame:Safe in their arms, the navy fears no flame,Till Jove
himself descends, his bolts to shed,And hurl the blazing ruin at our head.Great
must he be, of more than human birth,Nor feed like mortals on the fruits of
earth.Him neither rocks can crush, nor steel can wound,Whom Ajax fells not on
the ensanguined ground.In standing fight he mates Achilles’ force,Excell’d alone
in swiftness in the course.Then to the left our ready arms apply,And live with
glory, or with glory die.”He said: and Merion to th’ appointed place,Fierce as
the god of battles, urged his pace.Soon as the foe the shining chiefs beheldRush
like a fiery torrent o’er the field,Their force embodied in a tide they pour;The
rising combat sounds along the shore.As warring winds, in Sirius’ sultry
reign,From different quarters sweep the sandy plain;On every side the dusty
whirlwinds rise,And the dry fields are lifted to the skies:Thus by despair,
hope, rage, together driven,Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darken’d
heaven.All dreadful glared the iron face of war,Bristled with upright spears,
that flash’d afar;Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields,And
polish’d arms emblazed the flaming fields:Tremendous scene! that general horror
gave,But touch’d with joy the bosoms of the brave.Saturn’s great sons in fierce
contention vied,And crowds of heroes in their anger died.The sire of earth and
heaven, by Thetis wonTo crown with glory Peleus’ godlike son,Will’d not
destruction to the Grecian powers,But spared awhile the destined Trojan
towers;While Neptune, rising from his azure main,Warr’d on the king of heaven
with stern disdain,And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.Gods of one
source, of one ethereal race,Alike divine, and heaven their native place;But
Jove the greater; first-born of the skies,And more than men, or gods, supremely
wise.For this, of Jove’s superior might afraid,Neptune in human form conceal’d
his aid.These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan trainIn war and discord’s
adamantine chain,Indissolubly strong: the fatal tieIs stretch’d on both, and
close compell’d they die.Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey,The bold
Idomeneus controls the day.First by his hand Othryoneus was slain,Swell’d with
false hopes, with mad ambition vain;Call’d by the voice of war to martial
fame,From high Cabesus’ distant walls he came;Cassandra’s love he sought, with
boasts of power,And promised conquest was the proffer’d dower.The king
consented, by his vaunts abused;The king consented, but the fates refused.Proud
of himself, and of the imagined bride,The field he measured with a larger
stride.Him as he stalk’d, the Cretan javelin found;Vain was his breastplate to
repel the wound:His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell;His arms resounded
as the boaster fell.The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead;“And thus (he cries)
behold thy promise sped!Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring,And such the
contract of the Phrygian king!Our offers now, illustrious prince! receive;For
such an aid what will not Argos give?To conquer Troy, with ours thy forces
join,And count Atrides’ fairest daughter thine.Meantime, on further methods to
advise,Come, follow to the fleet thy new allies;There hear what Greece has on
her part to say.”He spoke, and dragg’d the gory corse away.This Asius view’d,
unable to contain,Before his chariot warring on the plain:(His crowded coursers,
to his squire consign’d,Impatient panted on his neck behind:)To vengeance rising
with a sudden spring,He hoped the conquest of the Cretan king.The wary Cretan,
as his foe drew near,Full on his throat discharged the forceful spear:Beneath
the chin the point was seen to glide,And glitter’d, extant at the further
side.As when the mountain-oak, or poplar tall,Or pine, fit mast for some great
admiral,Groans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound,Then spreads a length of
ruin o’er the ground:So sunk proud Asius in that dreadful day,And stretch’d
before his much-loved coursers lay.He grinds the dust distain’d with streaming
gore,And, fierce in death, lies foaming on the shore.Deprived of motion, stiff
with stupid fear,Stands all aghast his trembling charioteer,Nor shuns the foe,
nor turns the steeds away,But falls transfix’d, an unresisting prey:Pierced by
Antilochus, he pants beneathThe stately car, and labours out his breath.Thus
Asius’ steeds (their mighty master gone)Remain the prize of Nestor’s youthful
son.Stabb’d at the sight, Deiphobus drew nigh,And made, with force, the vengeful
weapon fly.The Cretan saw; and, stooping, caused to glanceFrom his slope shield
the disappointed lance.Beneath the spacious targe, (a blazing round,Thick with
bull-hides and brazen orbits bound,On his raised arm by two strong braces
stay’d,)He lay collected in defensive shade.O’er his safe head the javelin idly
sung,And on the tinkling verge more faintly rung.Even then the spear the
vigorous arm confess’d,And pierced, obliquely, king Hypsenor’s breast:Warm’d in
his liver, to the ground it boreThe chief, his people’s guardian now no
more!“Not unattended (the proud Trojan cries)Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius
lies:For thee, through hell’s black portals stand display’d,This mate shall joy
thy melancholy shade.”Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast,Touch’d every
Greek, but Nestor’s son the most.Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend,And
his broad buckler shields his slaughter’d friend:Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor
boreHis honour’d body to the tented shore.Nor yet from fight Idomeneus
withdraws;Resolved to perish in his country’s cause,Or find some foe, whom
heaven and he shall doomTo wail his fate in death’s eternal gloom.He sees
Alcathous in the front aspire:Great Æsyetes was the hero’s sire;His spouse
Hippodame, divinely fair,Anchises’ eldest hope, and darling care:Who charm’d her
parents’ and her husband’s heartWith beauty, sense, and every work of art:He
once of Ilion’s youth the loveliest boy,The fairest she of all the fair of
Troy.By Neptune now the hapless hero dies,Who covers with a cloud those
beauteous eyes,And fetters every limb: yet bent to meetHis fate he stands; nor
shuns the lance of Crete.Fix’d as some column, or deep-rooted oak,While the
winds sleep; his breast received the stroke.Before the ponderous stroke his
corslet yields,Long used to ward the death in fighting fields.The riven armour
sends a jarring sound;His labouring heart heaves with so strong a bound,The long
lance shakes, and vibrates in the wound;Fast flowing from its source, as prone
he lay,Life’s purple tide impetuous gush’d away.Then Idomen, insulting o’er the
slain:“Behold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain:See! on one Greek three Trojan
ghosts attend;This, my third victim, to the shades I send.Approaching now thy
boasted might approve,And try the prowess of the seed of Jove.From Jove,
enamour’d of a mortal dame,Great Minos, guardian of his country, came:Deucalion,
blameless prince, was Minos’ heir;His first-born I, the third from Jupiter:O’er
spacious Crete, and her bold sons, I reign,And thence my ships transport me
through the main:Lord of a host, o’er all my host I shine,A scourge to thee, thy
father, and thy line.”The Trojan heard; uncertain or to meet,Alone, with
venturous arms the king of Crete,Or seek auxiliar force; at length decreedTo
call some hero to partake the deed,Forthwith Æneas rises to his thought:For him
in Troy’s remotest lines he sought,Where he, incensed at partial Priam,
stands,And sees superior posts in meaner hands.To him, ambitious of so great an
aid,The bold Deiphobus approach’d, and said:“Now, Trojan prince, employ thy
pious arms,If e’er thy bosom felt fair honour’s charms.Alcathous dies, thy
brother and thy friend;Come, and the warrior’s loved remains defend.Beneath his
cares thy early youth was train’d,One table fed you, and one roof contain’d.This
deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe;Haste, and revenge it on th’ insulting
foe.”Æneas heard, and for a space resign’dTo tender pity all his manly mind;Then
rising in his rage, he burns to fight:The Greek awaits him with collected
might.As the fell boar, on some rough mountain’s head,Arm’d with wild terrors,
and to slaughter bred,When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far,Attends the
tumult, and expects the war;O’er his bent back the bristly horrors rise;Fires
stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes,His foaming tusks both dogs and men
engage;But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage:So stood Idomeneus, his
javelin shook,And met the Trojan with a lowering look.Antilochus, Deipyrus, were
near,The youthful offspring of the god of war,Merion, and Aphareus, in field
renown’d:To these the warrior sent his voice around.“Fellows in arms! your
timely aid unite;Lo, great Æneas rushes to the fight:Sprung from a god, and more
than mortal bold;He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old.Else should this
hand, this hour decide the strife,The great dispute, of glory, or of life.”He
spoke, and all, as with one soul, obey’d;Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful
shadeAround the chief. Æneas too demandsTh’ assisting forces of his native
bands;Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join;(Co-aids and captains of the Trojan
line;)In order follow all th’ embodied train,Like Ida’s flocks proceeding o’er
the plain;Before his fleecy care, erect and bold,Stalks the proud ram, the
father of the bold.With joy the swain surveys them, as he leadsTo the cool
fountains, through the well-known meads:So joys Æneas, as his native bandMoves
on in rank, and stretches o’er the land.Round dread Alcathous now the battle
rose;On every side the steely circle grows;Now batter’d breast-plates and hack’d
helmets ring,And o’er their heads unheeded javelins sing.Above the rest, two
towering chiefs appear,There great Idomeneus, Æneas here.Like gods of war,
dispensing fate, they stood,And burn’d to drench the ground with mutual
blood.The Trojan weapon whizz’d along in air;The Cretan saw, and shunn’d the
brazen spear:Sent from an arm so strong, the missive woodStuck deep in earth,
and quiver’d where it stood.But OEnomas received the Cretan’s stroke;The
forceful spear his hollow corslet broke,It ripp’d his belly with a ghastly
wound,And roll’d the smoking entrails on the ground.Stretch’d on the plain, he
sobs away his breath,And, furious, grasps the bloody dust in death.The victor
from his breast the weapon tears;His spoils he could not, for the shower of
spears.Though now unfit an active war to wage,Heavy with cumbrous arms, stiff
with cold age,His listless limbs unable for the course,In standing fight he yet
maintains his force;Till faint with labour, and by foes repell’d,His tired slow
steps he drags from off the field.Deiphobus beheld him as he pass’d,And, fired
with hate, a parting javelin cast:The javelin err’d, but held its course
along,And pierced Ascalaphus, the brave and young:The son of Mars fell gasping
on the ground,And gnash’d the dust, all bloody with his wound.Nor knew the
furious father of his fall;High-throned amidst the great Olympian hall,On golden
clouds th’ immortal synod sate;Detain’d from bloody war by Jove and Fate.Now,
where in dust the breathless hero lay,For slain Ascalaphus commenced the
fray,Deiphobus to seize his helmet flies,And from his temples rends the
glittering prize;Valiant as Mars, Meriones drew near,And on his loaded arm
discharged his spear:He drops the weight, disabled with the pain;The hollow
helmet rings against the plain.Swift as a vulture leaping on his prey,From his
torn arm the Grecian rent awayThe reeking javelin, and rejoin’d his friends.His
wounded brother good Polites tends;Around his waist his pious arms he threw,And
from the rage of battle gently drew:Him his swift coursers, on his splendid
car,Rapt from the lessening thunder of the war;To Troy they drove him, groaning
from the shore,And sprinkling, as he pass’d, the sands with gore.Meanwhile fresh
slaughter bathes the sanguine ground,Heaps fall on heaps, and heaven and earth
resound.Bold Aphareus by great Æneas bled;As toward the chief he turn’d his
daring head,He pierced his throat; the bending head, depress’dBeneath his
helmet, nods upon his breast;His shield reversed o’er the fallen warrior
lies,And everlasting slumber seals his eyes.Antilochus, as Thoon turn’d him
round,Transpierced his back with a dishonest wound:The hollow vein, that to the
neck extendsAlong the chine, his eager javelin rends:Supine he falls, and to his
social trainSpreads his imploring arms, but spreads in vain.Thv exulting victor,
leaping where he lay,From his broad shoulders tore the spoils away;His time
observed; for closed by foes around,On all sides thick the peals of arms
resound.His shield emboss’d the ringing storm sustains,But he impervious and
untouch’d remains.(Great Neptune’s care preserved from hostile rageThis youth,
the joy of Nestor’s glorious age.)In arms intrepid, with the first he
fought,Faced every foe, and every danger sought;His winged lance, resistless as
the wind,Obeys each motion of the master’s mind!Restless it flies, impatient to
be free,And meditates the distant enemy.The son of Asius, Adamas, drew near,And
struck his target with the brazen spearFierce in his front: but Neptune wards
the blow,And blunts the javelin of th’ eluded foe:In the broad buckler half the
weapon stood,Splinter’d on earth flew half the broken wood.Disarm’d, he mingled
in the Trojan crew;But Merion’s spear o’ertook him as he flew,Deep in the
belly’s rim an entrance found,Where sharp the pang, and mortal is the
wound.Bending he fell, and doubled to the ground,Lay panting. Thus an ox in
fetters tied,While death’s strong pangs distend his labouring side,His bulk
enormous on the field displays;His heaving heart beats thick as ebbing life
decays.The spear the conqueror from his body drew,And death’s dim shadows swarm
before his view.Next brave Deipyrus in dust was laid:King Helenus waved high the
Thracian blade,And smote his temples with an arm so strong,The helm fell off,
and roll’d amid the throng:There for some luckier Greek it rests a prize;For
dark in death the godlike owner lies!Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns,And
fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns:That shook the ponderous lance, in
act to throw;And this stood adverse with the bended bow:Full on his breast the
Trojan arrow fell,But harmless bounded from the plated steel.As on some ample
barn’s well harden’d floor,(The winds collected at each open door,)While the
broad fan with force is whirl’d around,Light leaps the golden grain, resulting
from the ground:So from the steel that guards Atrides’ heart,Repell’d to
distance flies the bounding dart.Atrides, watchful of the unwary foe,Pierced
with his lance the hand that grasp’d the bow.And nailed it to the yew: the
wounded handTrail’d the long lance that mark’d with blood the sand:But good
Agenor gently from the woundThe spear solicits, and the bandage bound;A sling’s
soft wool, snatch’d from a soldier’s side,At once the tent and ligature
supplied.Behold! Pisander, urged by fate’s decree,Springs through the ranks to
fall, and fall by thee,Great Menelaus! to enchance thy fame:High-towering in the
front, the warrior came.First the sharp lance was by Atrides thrown;The lance
far distant by the winds was blown.Nor pierced Pisander through Atrides’
shield:Pisander’s spear fell shiver’d on the field.Not so discouraged, to the
future blind,Vain dreams of conquest swell his haughty mind;Dauntless he rushes
where the Spartan lordLike lightning brandish’d his far beaming sword.His left
arm high opposed the shining shield:His right beneath, the cover’d pole-axe
held;(An olive’s cloudy grain the handle made,Distinct with studs, and brazen
was the blade;)This on the helm discharged a noble blow;The plume dropp’d
nodding to the plain below,Shorn from the crest. Atrides waved his steel:Deep
through his front the weighty falchion fell;The crashing bones before its force
gave way;In dust and blood the groaning hero lay:Forced from their ghastly orbs,
and spouting gore,The clotted eye-balls tumble on the shore.And fierce Atrides
spurn’d him as he bled,Tore off his arms, and, loud-exulting, said:“Thus,
Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear;O race perfidious, who delight in
war!Already noble deeds ye have perform’d;A princess raped transcends a navy
storm’d:In such bold feats your impious might approve,Without th’ assistance, or
the fear of Jove.The violated rites, the ravish’d dame;Our heroes slaughter’d
and our ships on flame,Crimes heap’d on crimes, shall bend your glory down,And
whelm in ruins yon flagitious town.O thou, great father! lord of earth and
skies,Above the thought of man, supremely wise!If from thy hand the fates of
mortals flow,From whence this favour to an impious foe?A godless crew, abandon’d
and unjust,Still breathing rapine, violence, and lust?The best of things, beyond
their measure, cloy;Sleep’s balmy blessing, love’s endearing joy;The feast, the
dance; whate’er mankind desire,Even the sweet charms of sacred numbers tire.But
Troy for ever reaps a dire delightIn thirst of slaughter, and in lust of
fight.”This said, he seized (while yet the carcase heaved)The bloody armour,
which his train received:Then sudden mix’d among the warring crew,And the bold
son of Pylæmenes slew.Harpalion had through Asia travell’d far,Following his
martial father to the war:Through filial love he left his native shore,Never,
ah, never to behold it more!His unsuccessful spear he chanced to flingAgainst
the target of the Spartan king;Thus of his lance disarm’d, from death he
flies,And turns around his apprehensive eyes.Him, through the hip transpiercing
as he fled,The shaft of Merion mingled with the dead.Beneath the bone the
glancing point descends,And, driving down, the swelling bladder rends:Sunk in
his sad companions’ arms he lay,And in short pantings sobb’d his soul away;(Like
some vile worm extended on the ground;)While life’s red torrent gush’d from out
the wound.Him on his car the Paphlagonian trainIn slow procession bore from off
the plain.The pensive father, father now no more!Attends the mournful pomp along
the shore;And unavailing tears profusely shed;And, unrevenged, deplored his
offspring dead.Paris from far the moving sight beheld,With pity soften’d and
with fury swell’d:His honour’d host, a youth of matchless grace,And loved of all
the Paphlagonian race!With his full strength he bent his angry bow,And wing’d
the feather’d vengeance at the foe.A chief there was, the brave Euchenor
named,For riches much, and more for virtue famed.Who held his seat in Corinth’s
stately town;Polydus’ son, a seer of old renown.Oft had the father told his
early doom,By arms abroad, or slow disease at home:He climb’d his vessel,
prodigal of breath,And chose the certain glorious path to death.Beneath his ear
the pointed arrow went;The soul came issuing at the narrow vent:His limbs,
unnerved, drop useless on the ground,And everlasting darkness shades him
round.Nor knew great Hector how his legions yield,(Wrapp’d in the cloud and
tumult of the field:)Wide on the left the force of Greece commands,And conquest
hovers o’er th’ Achaian bands;With such a tide superior virtue sway’d,And he
that shakes the solid earth gave aid.But in the centre Hector fix’d
remain’d,Where first the gates were forced, and bulwarks gain’d;There, on the
margin of the hoary deep,(Their naval station where the Ajaces keep.And where
low walls confine the beating tides,Whose humble barrier scarce the foe
divides;Where late in fight both foot and horse engaged,And all the thunder of
the battle raged,)There join’d, the whole Bœotian strength remains,The proud
Iaonians with their sweeping trains,Locrians and Phthians, and th’ Epaean
force;But join’d, repel not Hector’s fiery course.The flower of Athens,
Stichius, Phidas, led;Bias and great Menestheus at their head:Meges the strong
the Epaean bands controll’d,And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold:The Phthians,
Medon, famed for martial might,And brave Podarces, active in the fight.This drew
from Phylacus his noble line;Iphiclus’ son: and that (Oïleus) thine:(Young Ajax’
brother, by a stolen embrace;He dwelt far distant from his native place,By his
fierce step-dame from his father’s reignExpell’d and exiled for her brother
slain:)These rule the Phthians, and their arms employ,Mix’d with Bœotians, on
the shores of Troy.Now side by side, with like unwearied care,Each Ajax laboured
through the field of war:So when two lordly bulls, with equal toil,Force the
bright ploughshare through the fallow soil,Join’d to one yoke, the stubborn
earth they tear,And trace large furrows with the shining share;O’er their huge
limbs the foam descends in snow,And streams of sweat down their sour foreheads
flow.A train of heroes followed through the field,Who bore by turns great Ajax’
sevenfold shield;Whene’er he breathed, remissive of his might,Tired with the
incessant slaughters of the fight.No following troops his brave associate
grace:In close engagement an unpractised race,The Locrian squadrons nor the
javelin wield,Nor bear the helm, nor lift the moony shield;But skill’d from far
the flying shaft to wing,Or whirl the sounding pebble from the sling,Dexterous
with these they aim a certain wound,Or fell the distant warrior to the
ground.Thus in the van the Telamonian train,Throng’d in bright arms, a pressing
fight maintain:Far in the rear the Locrian archers lie,Whose stones and arrows
intercept the sky,The mingled tempest on the foes they pour;Troy’s scattering
orders open to the shower.Now had the Greeks eternal fame acquired,And the
gall’d Ilians to their walls retired;But sage Polydamas, discreetly
brave,Address’d great Hector, and this counsel gave:“Though great in all, thou
seem’st averse to lendImpartial audience to a faithful friend;To gods and men
thy matchless worth is known,And every art of glorious war thy own;But in cool
thought and counsel to excel,How widely differs this from warring well!Content
with what the bounteous gods have given,Seek not alone to engross the gifts of
Heaven.To some the powers of bloody war belong,To some sweet music and the charm
of song;To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assign’dA wise, extensive,
all-considering mind;Their guardians these, the nations round confess,And towns
and empires for their safety bless.If Heaven have lodged this virtue in my
breast,Attend, O Hector! what I judge the best,See, as thou mov’st, on dangers
dangers spread,And war’s whole fury burns around thy head.Behold! distress’d
within yon hostile wall,How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall!What troops,
out-number’d, scarce the war maintain!And what brave heroes at the ships lie
slain!Here cease thy fury: and, the chiefs and kingsConvoked to council, weigh
the sum of things.Whether (the gods succeeding our desires)To yon tall ships to
bear the Trojan fires;Or quit the fleet, and pass unhurt away,Contented with the
conquest of the day.I fear, I fear, lest Greece, not yet undone,Pay the large
debt of last revolving sun;Achilles, great Achilles, yet remainsOn yonder decks,
and yet o’erlooks the plains!”The counsel pleased; and Hector, with a
bound,Leap’d from his chariot on the trembling ground;Swift as he leap’d his
clanging arms resound.“To guard this post (he cried) thy art employ,And here
detain the scatter’d youth of Troy;Where yonder heroes faint, I bend my way,And
hasten back to end the doubtful day.”This said, the towering chief prepares to
go,Shakes his white plumes that to the breezes flow,And seems a moving mountain
topp’d with snow.Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies,And bids anew
the martial thunder rise.To Panthus’ son, at Hector’s high commandHaste the bold
leaders of the Trojan band:But round the battlements, and round the plain,For
many a chief he look’d, but look’d in vain;Deiphobus, nor Helenus the seer,Nor
Asius’ son, nor Asius’ self appear:For these were pierced with many a ghastly
wound,Some cold in death, some groaning on the ground;Some low in dust, (a
mournful object) lay;High on the wall some breathed their souls away.Far on the
left, amid the throng he found(Cheering the troops, and dealing deaths
around)The graceful Paris; whom, with fury moved,Opprobrious thus, th’ impatient
chief reproved:“Ill-fated Paris! slave to womankind,As smooth of face as
fraudulent of mind!Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone?The godlike father, and
th’ intrepid son?The force of Helenus, dispensing fate;And great Othryoneus, so
fear’d of late?Black fate hang’s o’er thee from th’ avenging gods,Imperial Troy
from her foundations nods;Whelm’d in thy country’s ruin shalt thou fall,And one
devouring vengeance swallow all.”When Paris thus: “My brother and my friend,Thy
warm impatience makes thy tongue offend,In other battles I deserved thy
blame,Though then not deedless, nor unknown to fame:But since yon rampart by thy
arms lay low,I scatter’d slaughter from my fatal bow.The chiefs you seek on
yonder shore lie slain;Of all those heroes, two alone remain;Deiphobus, and
Helenus the seer,Each now disabled by a hostile spear.Go then, successful, where
thy soul inspires:This heart and hand shall second all thy fires:What with this
arm I can, prepare to know,Till death for death be paid, and blow for blow.But
’tis not ours, with forces not our ownTo combat: strength is of the gods
alone.”These words the hero’s angry mind assuage:Then fierce they mingle where
the thickest rage.Around Polydamas, distain’d with blood,Cebrion, Phalces, stern
Orthaeus stood,Palmus, with Polypœtes the divine,And two bold brothers of
Hippotion’s line(Who reach’d fair Ilion, from Ascania far,The former day; the
next engaged in war).As when from gloomy clouds a whirlwind springs,That bears
Jove’s thunder on its dreadful wings,Wide o’er the blasted fields the tempest
sweeps;Then, gather’d, settles on the hoary deeps;The afflicted deeps tumultuous
mix and roar;The waves behind impel the waves before,Wide rolling, foaming high,
and tumbling to the shore:Thus rank on rank, the thick battalions throng,Chief
urged on chief, and man drove man along.Far o’er the plains, in dreadful order
bright,The brazen arms reflect a beamy light:Full in the blazing van great
Hector shined,Like Mars commission’d to confound mankind.Before him flaming his
enormous shield,Like the broad sun, illumined all the field;His nodding helm
emits a streamy ray;His piercing eyes through all the battle stray,And, while
beneath his targe he flash’d along,Shot terrors round, that wither’d e’en the
strong.Thus stalk’d he, dreadful; death was in his look:Whole nations fear’d;
but not an Argive shook.The towering Ajax, with an ample stride,Advanced the
first, and thus the chief defied:“Hector! come on; thy empty threats
forbear;’Tis not thy arm, ’tis thundering Jove we fear:The skill of war to us
not idly given,Lo! Greece is humbled, not by Troy, but Heaven.Vain are the hopes
that haughty mind imparts,To force our fleet: the Greeks have hands and
hearts.Long ere in flames our lofty navy fall,Your boasted city, and your
god-built wall,Shall sink beneath us, smoking on the ground;And spread a long
unmeasured ruin round.The time shall come, when, chased along the plain,Even
thou shalt call on Jove, and call in vain;Even thou shalt wish, to aid thy
desperate course,The wings of falcons for thy flying horse;Shalt run, forgetful
of a warrior’s fame,While clouds of friendly dust conceal thy shame.”As thus he
spoke, behold, in open view,On sounding wings a dexter eagle flew.To Jove’s glad
omen all the Grecians rise,And hail, with shouts, his progress through the
skies:Far-echoing clamours bound from side to side;They ceased; and thus the
chief of Troy replied:“From whence this menace, this insulting strain?Enormous
boaster! doom’d to vaunt in vain.So may the gods on Hector life bestow,(Not that
short life which mortals lead below,But such as those of Jove’s high lineage
born,The blue-eyed maid, or he that gilds the morn,)As this decisive day shall
end the fameOf Greece, and Argos be no more a name.And thou, imperious! if thy
madness waitThe lance of Hector, thou shalt meet thy fate:That giant-corse,
extended on the shore,Shall largely feast the fowls with fat and gore.”He said;
and like a lion stalk’d along:With shouts incessant earth and ocean rung,Sent
from his following host: the Grecian trainWith answering thunders fill’d the
echoing plain;A shout that tore heaven’s concave, and, above,Shook the fix’d
splendours of the throne of Jove.[Illustration: ] GREEK EARRINGSBOOK
XIV.ARGUMENT.[231]JUNO DECEIVES JUPITER BY THE GIRDLE OF VENUS.Nestor, sitting
at the table with Machaon, is alarmed with theincreasing clamour of war, and
hastens to Agamemnon; on his way hemeets that prince with Diomed and Ulysses,
whom he informs of theextremity of the danger. Agamemnon proposes to make their
escape bynight, which Ulysses withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice,
that,wounded as they were, they should go forth and encourage the army withtheir
presence, which advice is pursued. Juno, seeing the partiality ofJupiter to the
Trojans, forms a design to over-reach him: she sets offher charms with the
utmost care, and (the more surely to enchant him)obtains the magic girdle of
Venus. She then applies herself to the godof sleep, and, with some difficulty,
persuades him to seal the eyes ofJupiter: this done, she goes to mount Ida,
where the god, at firstsight, is ravished with her beauty, sinks in her
embraces, and is laidasleep. Neptune takes advantage of his slumber, and
succours theGreeks: Hector is struck to the ground with a prodigious stone by
Ajax,and carried off from the battle: several actions succeed, till theTrojans,
much distressed, are obliged to give way: the lesser Ajaxsignalizes himself in a
particular manner.But not the genial feast, nor flowing bowl,Could charm the
cares of Nestor’s watchful soul;His startled ears the increasing cries
attend;Then thus, impatient, to his wounded friend:“What new alarm, divine
Machaon, say,What mix’d events attend this mighty day?Hark! how the shouts
divide, and how they meet,And now come full, and thicken to the fleet!Here with
the cordial draught dispel thy care,Let Hecamede the strengthening bath
prepare,Refresh thy wound, and cleanse the clotted gore;While I the adventures
of the day explore.”He said: and, seizing Thrasymedes’ shield,(His valiant
offspring,) hasten’d to the field;(That day the son his father’s buckler
bore;)Then snatch’d a lance, and issued from the door.Soon as the prospect
open’d to his view,His wounded eyes the scene of sorrow knew;Dire disarray! the
tumult of the fight,The wall in ruins, and the Greeks in flight.As when old
ocean’s silent surface sleeps,The waves just heaving on the purple deeps:While
yet the expected tempest hangs on high,Weighs down the cloud, and blackens in
the sky,The mass of waters will no wind obey;Jove sends one gust, and bids them
roll away.While wavering counsels thus his mind engage,Fluctuates in doubtful
thought the Pylian sage,To join the host, or to the general haste;Debating long,
he fixes on the last:Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom warms,The field rings
dreadful with the clang of arms,The gleaming falchions flash, the javelins
fly;Blows echo blows, and all or kill or die.Him, in his march, the wounded
princes meet,By tardy steps ascending from the fleet:The king of men, Ulysses
the divine,And who to Tydeus owes his noble line[232](Their ships at distance
from the battle stand,In lines advanced along the shelving strand:Whose bay, the
fleet unable to containAt length; beside the margin of the main,Rank above rank,
the crowded ships they moor:Who landed first, lay highest on the
shore.)Supported on the spears, they took their way,Unfit to fight, but anxious
for the day.Nestor’s approach alarm’d each Grecian breast,Whom thus the general
of the host address’d:“O grace and glory of the Achaian name;What drives thee,
Nestor, from the field of fame?Shall then proud Hector see his boast
fulfill’d,Our fleets in ashes, and our heroes kill’d?Such was his threat, ah!
now too soon made good,On many a Grecian bosom writ in blood.Is every heart
inflamed with equal rageAgainst your king, nor will one chief engage?And have I
lived to see with mournful eyesIn every Greek a new Achilles rise?”Gerenian
Nestor then: “So fate has will’d;And all-confirming time has fate fulfill’d.Not
he that thunders from the aerial bower,Not Jove himself, upon the past has
power.The wall, our late inviolable bound,And best defence, lies smoking on the
ground:Even to the ships their conquering arms extend,And groans of slaughter’d
Greeks to heaven ascend.On speedy measures then employ your thoughtIn such
distress! if counsel profit aught:Arms cannot much: though Mars our souls
incite,These gaping wounds withhold us from the fight.”To him the monarch: “That
our army bends,That Troy triumphant our high fleet ascends,And that the rampart,
late our surest trustAnd best defence, lies smoking in the dust;All this from
Jove’s afflictive hand we bear,Who, far from Argos, wills our ruin here.Past are
the days when happier Greece was blest,And all his favour, all his aid
confess’d;Now heaven averse, our hands from battle ties,And lifts the Trojan
glory to the skies.Cease we at length to waste our blood in vain,And launch what
ships lie nearest to the main;Leave these at anchor, till the coming night:Then,
if impetuous Troy forbear the fight,Bring all to sea, and hoist each sail for
flight.Better from evils, well foreseen, to run,Than perish in the danger we may
shun.”Thus he. The sage Ulysses thus replies,While anger flash’d from his
disdainful eyes:“What shameful words (unkingly as thou art)Fall from that
trembling tongue and timorous heart?Oh were thy sway the curse of meaner
powers,And thou the shame of any host but ours!A host, by Jove endued with
martial might,And taught to conquer, or to fall in fight:Adventurous combats and
bold wars to wage,Employ’d our youth, and yet employs our age.And wilt thou thus
desert the Trojan plain?And have whole streams of blood been spilt in vain?In
such base sentence if thou couch thy fear,Speak it in whispers, lest a Greek
should hear.Lives there a man so dead to fame, who daresTo think such meanness,
or the thought declares?And comes it even from him whose sovereign swayThe
banded legions of all Greece obey?Is this a general’s voice that calls to
flight,While war hangs doubtful, while his soldiers fight?What more could Troy?
What yet their fate deniesThou givest the foe: all Greece becomes their prize.No
more the troops (our hoisted sails in view,Themselves abandon’d) shall the fight
pursue;But thy ships flying, with despair shall see;And owe destruction to a
prince like thee.”“Thy just reproofs (Atrides calm replies)Like arrows pierce
me, for thy words are wise.Unwilling as I am to lose the host,I force not Greece
to quit this hateful coast;Glad I submit, whoe’er, or young, or old,Aught, more
conducive to our weal, unfold.”Tydides cut him short, and thus began:“Such
counsel if you seek, behold the manWho boldly gives it, and what he shall
say,Young though he be, disdain not to obey:A youth, who from the mighty Tydeus
springs,May speak to councils and assembled kings.Hear then in me the great
OEnides’ son,Whose honoured dust (his race of glory run)Lies whelm’d in ruins of
the Theban wall;Brave in his life, and glorious in his fall.With three bold sons
was generous Prothous bless’d,Who Pleuron’s walls and Calydon possess’d;Melas
and Agrius, but (who far surpass’dThe rest in courage) Œneus was the last.From
him, my sire. From Calydon expell’d,He pass’d to Argos, and in exile dwell’d;The
monarch’s daughter there (so Jove ordain’d)He won, and flourish’d where Adrastus
reign’d;There, rich in fortune’s gifts, his acres till’d,Beheld his vines their
liquid harvest yield,And numerous flocks that whiten’d all the field.Such Tydeus
was, the foremost once in fame!Nor lives in Greece a stranger to his name.Then,
what for common good my thoughts inspire,Attend, and in the son respect the
sire.Though sore of battle, though with wounds oppress’d,Let each go forth, and
animate the rest,Advance the glory which he cannot share,Though not partaker,
witness of the war.But lest new wounds on wounds o’erpower us quite,Beyond the
missile javelin’s sounding flight,Safe let us stand; and, from the tumult
far,Inspire the ranks, and rule the distant war.”He added not: the listening
kings obey,Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way.The god of ocean (to inflame
their rage)Appears a warrior furrowed o’er with age;Press’d in his own, the
general’s hand he took,And thus the venerable hero spoke:“Atrides! lo! with what
disdainful eyeAchilles sees his country’s forces fly;Blind, impious man! whose
anger is his guide,Who glories in unutterable pride.So may he perish, so may
Jove disclaimThe wretch relentless, and o’erwhelm with shame!But Heaven forsakes
not thee: o’er yonder sandsSoon shall thou view the scattered Trojan bandsFly
diverse; while proud kings, and chiefs renown’d,Driven heaps on heaps, with
clouds involved aroundOf rolling dust, their winged wheels employTo hide their
ignominious heads in Troy.”He spoke, then rush’d amid the warrior crew,And sent
his voice before him as he flew,Loud, as the shout encountering armies yieldWhen
twice ten thousand shake the labouring field;Such was the voice, and such the
thundering soundOf him whose trident rends the solid ground.Each Argive bosom
beats to meet the fight,And grisly war appears a pleasing sight.Meantime
Saturnia from Olympus’ brow,High-throned in gold, beheld the fields below;With
joy the glorious conflict she survey’d,Where her great brother gave the Grecians
aid.But placed aloft, on Ida’s shady heightShe sees her Jove, and trembles at
the sight.Jove to deceive, what methods shall she try,What arts, to blind his
all-beholding eye?At length she trusts her power; resolved to proveThe old, yet
still successful, cheat of love;Against his wisdom to oppose her charms,And lull
the lord of thunders in her arms.Swift to her bright apartment she
repairs,Sacred to dress and beauty’s pleasing cares:With skill divine had Vulcan
form’d the bower,Safe from access of each intruding power.Touch’d with her
secret key, the doors unfold:Self-closed, behind her shut the valves of
gold.Here first she bathes; and round her body poursSoft oils of fragrance, and
ambrosial showers:The winds, perfumed, the balmy gale conveyThrough heaven,
through earth, and all the aerial way:Spirit divine! whose exhalation greetsThe
sense of gods with more than mortal sweets.Thus while she breathed of heaven,
with decent prideHer artful hands the radiant tresses tied;Part on her head in
shining ringlets roll’d,Part o’er her shoulders waved like melted gold.Around
her next a heavenly mantle flow’d,That rich with Pallas’ labour’d colours
glow’d:Large clasps of gold the foldings gather’d round,A golden zone her
swelling bosom bound.Far-beaming pendants tremble in her ear,Each gem illumined
with a triple star.Then o’er her head she cast a veil more whiteThan new-fallen
snow, and dazzling as the light.Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace.Thus
issuing radiant with majestic pace,Forth from the dome the imperial goddess
moves,And calls the mother of the smiles and loves.“How long (to Venus thus
apart she cried)Shall human strife celestial minds divide?Ah yet, will Venus aid
Saturnia’s joy,And set aside the cause of Greece and Troy?”“Let heaven’s dread
empress (Cytheraea said)Speak her request, and deem her will obey’d.”“Then grant
me (said the queen) those conquering charms,That power, which mortals and
immortals warms,That love, which melts mankind in fierce desires,And burns the
sons of heaven with sacred fires!“For lo! I haste to those remote abodes,Where
the great parents, (sacred source of gods!)Ocean and Tethys their old empire
keep,On the last limits of the land and deep.In their kind arms my tender years
were past;What time old Saturn, from Olympus cast,Of upper heaven to Jove
resign’d the reign,Whelm’d under the huge mass of earth and main.For strife, I
hear, has made the union cease,Which held so long that ancient pair in
peace.What honour, and what love, shall I obtain,If I compose those fatal feuds
again;Once more their minds in mutual ties engage,And, what my youth has owed,
repay their age!”She said. With awe divine, the queen of loveObey’d the sister
and the wife of Jove;And from her fragrant breast the zone embraced,[233]With
various skill and high embroidery graced.In this was every art, and every
charm,To win the wisest, and the coldest warm:Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay
desire,The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire,Persuasive speech, and the more
persuasive sighs,Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes.This on her hand the
Cyprian Goddess laid:“Take this, and with it all thy wish;” she said.With smiles
she took the charm; and smiling press’dThe powerful cestus to her snowy
breast.Then Venus to the courts of Jove withdrew;Whilst from Olympus pleased
Saturnia flew.O’er high Pieria thence her course she bore,O’er fair Emathia’s
ever-pleasing shore,O’er Hemus’ hills with snows eternal crown’d;Nor once her
flying foot approach’d the ground.Then taking wing from Athos’ lofty steep,She
speeds to Lemnos o’er the rolling deep,And seeks the cave of Death’s
half-brother, Sleep.[234]“Sweet pleasing Sleep! (Saturnia thus began)Who
spread’st thy empire o’er each god and man;If e’er obsequious to thy Juno’s
will,O power of slumbers! hear, and favour still.Shed thy soft dews on Jove’s
immortal eyes,While sunk in love’s entrancing joys he lies.A splendid footstool,
and a throne, that shineWith gold unfading, Somnus, shall be thine;The work of
Vulcan; to indulge thy ease,When wine and feasts thy golden humours
please.”“Imperial dame (the balmy power replies),Great Saturn’s heir, and
empress of the skies!O’er other gods I spread my easy chain;The sire of all, old
Ocean, owns my reign.And his hush’d waves lie silent on the main.But how,
unbidden, shall I dare to steepJove’s awful temples in the dew of sleep?Long
since, too venturous, at thy bold command,On those eternal lids I laid my
hand;What time, deserting Ilion’s wasted plain,His conquering son, Alcides,
plough’d the main.When lo! the deeps arise, the tempests roar,And drive the hero
to the Coan shore:Great Jove, awaking, shook the blest abodesWith rising wrath,
and tumbled gods on gods;Me chief he sought, and from the realms on highHad
hurl’d indignant to the nether sky,But gentle Night, to whom I fled for aid,(The
friend of earth and heaven,) her wings display’d;Impower’d the wrath of gods and
men to tame,Even Jove revered the venerable dame.”“Vain are thy fears (the queen
of heaven replies,And, speaking, rolls her large majestic eyes);Think’st thou
that Troy has Jove’s high favour won,Like great Alcides, his all-conquering
son?Hear, and obey the mistress of the skies,Nor for the deed expect a vulgar
prize;For know, thy loved-one shall be ever thine,The youngest Grace, Pasithaë
the divine.”[235]“Swear then (he said) by those tremendous floodsThat roar
through hell, and bind the invoking gods:Let the great parent earth one hand
sustain,And stretch the other o’er the sacred main:Call the black Titans, that
with Chronos dwell,To hear and witness from the depths of hell;That she, my
loved-one, shall be ever mine,The youngest Grace, Pasithaë the divine.”The queen
assents, and from the infernal bowersInvokes the sable subtartarean powers,And
those who rule the inviolable floods,Whom mortals name the dread Titanian
gods.[Illustration: ] SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITERThen swift as
wind, o’er Lemnos’ smoky isleThey wing their way, and Imbrus’ sea-beat
soil;Through air, unseen, involved in darkness glide,And light on Lectos, on the
point of Ide:(Mother of savages, whose echoing hillsAre heard resounding with a
hundred rills:)Fair Ida trembles underneath the god;Hush’d are her mountains,
and her forests nod.There on a fir, whose spiry branches riseTo join its summit
to the neighbouring skies;Dark in embowering shade, conceal’d from sight,Sat
Sleep, in likeness of the bird of night.(Chalcis his name by those of heavenly
birth,But call’d Cymindis by the race of earth.)To Ida’s top successful Juno
flies;Great Jove surveys her with desiring eyes:The god, whose lightning sets
the heavens on fire,Through all his bosom feels the fierce desire;Fierce as when
first by stealth he seized her charms,Mix’d with her soul, and melted in her
arms:Fix’d on her eyes he fed his eager look,Then press’d her hand, and thus
with transport spoke:“Why comes my goddess from the ethereal sky,And not her
steeds and flaming chariot nigh?”Then she—“I haste to those remote abodesWhere
the great parents of the deathless gods,The reverend Ocean and gray Tethys,
reign,On the last limits of the land and main.I visit these, to whose indulgent
caresI owe the nursing of my tender years:For strife, I hear, has made that
union ceaseWhich held so long that ancient pair in peace.The steeds, prepared my
chariot to conveyO’er earth and seas, and through the aerial way,Wait under Ide:
of thy superior powerTo ask consent, I leave the Olympian bower;Nor seek,
unknown to thee, the sacred cellsDeep under seas, where hoary Ocean dwells.”“For
that (said Jove) suffice another day!But eager love denies the least delay.Let
softer cares the present hour employ,And be these moments sacred all to
joy.Ne’er did my soul so strong a passion prove,Or for an earthly, or a heavenly
love:Not when I press’d Ixion’s matchless dame,Whence rose Pirithous like the
gods in fame:Not when fair Danae felt the shower of goldStream into life, whence
Perseus brave and bold.Not thus I burn’d for either Theban dame:(Bacchus from
this, from that Alcides came:)Nor Phœnix’ daughter, beautiful and young,Whence
godlike Rhadamanth and Minos sprung.[236]Not thus I burn’d for fair Latona’s
face,Nor comelier Ceres’ more majestic grace.Not thus even for thyself I felt
desire,As now my veins receive the pleasing fire.”He spoke; the goddess with the
charming eyesGlows with celestial red, and thus replies:“Is this a scene for
love? On Ida’s height,Exposed to mortal and immortal sight!Our joys profaned by
each familiar eye;The sport of heaven, and fable of the sky:How shall I e’er
review the blest abodes,Or mix among the senate of the gods?Shall I not think,
that, with disorder’d charms,All heaven beholds me recent from thy arms?With
skill divine has Vulcan form’d thy bower,Sacred to love and to the genial
hour;If such thy will, to that recess retire,In secret there indulge thy soft
desire.”She ceased; and, smiling with superior love,Thus answer’d mild the
cloud-compelling Jove:“Nor god nor mortal shall our joys behold,Shaded with
clouds, and circumfused in gold;Not even the sun, who darts through heaven his
rays,And whose broad eye the extended earth surveys.”Gazing he spoke, and,
kindling at the view,His eager arms around the goddess threw.Glad Earth
perceives, and from her bosom poursUnbidden herbs and voluntary flowers:Thick
new-born violets a soft carpet spread,And clustering lotos swell’d the rising
bed,And sudden hyacinths the turf bestrow,[237]And flamy crocus made the
mountain glowThere golden clouds conceal the heavenly pair,Steep’d in soft joys
and circumfused with air;Celestial dews, descending o’er the ground,Perfume the
mount, and breathe ambrosia round:At length, with love and sleep’s soft power
oppress’d,The panting thunderer nods, and sinks to rest.Now to the navy borne on
silent wings,To Neptune’s ear soft Sleep his message brings;Beside him sudden,
unperceived, he stood,And thus with gentle words address’d the god:“Now,
Neptune! now, the important hour employ,To check a while the haughty hopes of
Troy:While Jove yet rests, while yet my vapours shedThe golden vision round his
sacred head;For Juno’s love, and Somnus’ pleasing ties,Have closed those awful
and eternal eyes.”Thus having said, the power of slumber flew,On human lids to
drop the balmy dew.Neptune, with zeal increased, renews his care,And towering in
the foremost ranks of war,Indignant thus—“Oh once of martial fame!O Greeks! if
yet ye can deserve the name!This half-recover’d day shall Troy obtain?Shall
Hector thunder at your ships again?Lo! still he vaunts, and threats the fleet
with fires,While stern Achilles in his wrath retires.One hero’s loss too tamely
you deplore,Be still yourselves, and ye shall need no more.Oh yet, if glory any
bosom warms,Brace on your firmest helms, and stand to arms:His strongest spear
each valiant Grecian wield,Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest shield;Let to
the weak the lighter arms belong,The ponderous targe be wielded by the
strong.Thus arm’d, not Hector shall our presence stay;Myself, ye Greeks! myself
will lead the way.”[Illustration: ] GREEK SHIELDThe troops assent; their martial
arms they change:The busy chiefs their banded legions range.The kings, though
wounded, and oppress’d with pain,With helpful hands themselves assist the
train.The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield,The weaker warrior takes a
lighter shield.Thus sheath’d in shining brass, in bright arrayThe legions march,
and Neptune leads the way:His brandish’d falchion flames before their eyes,Like
lightning flashing through the frighted skies.Clad in his might, the
earth-shaking power appears;Pale mortals tremble, and confess their fears.Troy’s
great defender stands alone unawed,Arms his proud host, and dares oppose a
god:And lo! the god, and wondrous man, appear:The sea’s stern ruler there, and
Hector here.The roaring main, at her great master’s call,Rose in huge ranks, and
form’d a watery wallAround the ships: seas hanging o’er the shores,Both armies
join: earth thunders, ocean roars.Not half so loud the bellowing deeps
resound,When stormy winds disclose the dark profound;Less loud the winds that
from the Æolian hallRoar through the woods, and make whole forests fall;Less
loud the woods, when flames in torrents pour,Catch the dry mountain, and its
shades devour;With such a rage the meeting hosts are driven,And such a clamour
shakes the sounding heaven.The first bold javelin, urged by Hector’s
force,Direct at Ajax’ bosom winged its course;But there no pass the crossing
belts afford,(One braced his shield, and one sustain’d his sword.)Then back the
disappointed Trojan drew,And cursed the lance that unavailing flew:But ’scaped
not Ajax; his tempestuous handA ponderous stone upheaving from the sand,(Where
heaps laid loose beneath the warrior’s feet,Or served to ballast, or to prop the
fleet,)Toss’d round and round, the missive marble flings;On the razed shield the
fallen ruin rings,Full on his breast and throat with force descends;Nor deaden’d
there its giddy fury spends,But whirling on, with many a fiery round,Smokes in
the dust, and ploughs into the ground.As when the bolt, red-hissing from
above,Darts on the consecrated plant of Jove,The mountain-oak in flaming ruin
lies,Black from the blow, and smokes of sulphur rise;Stiff with amaze the pale
beholders stand,And own the terrors of the almighty hand!So lies great Hector
prostrate on the shore;His slacken’d hand deserts the lance it bore;His
following shield the fallen chief o’erspread;Beneath his helmet dropp’d his
fainting head;His load of armour, sinking to the ground,Clanks on the field, a
dead and hollow sound.Loud shouts of triumph fill the crowded plain;Greece sees,
in hope, Troy’s great defender slain:All spring to seize him; storms of arrows
fly,And thicker javelins intercept the sky.In vain an iron tempest hisses
round;He lies protected, and without a wound.[238]Polydamas, Agenor the
divine,The pious warrior of Anchises’ line,And each bold leader of the Lycian
band,With covering shields (a friendly circle) stand,His mournful followers,
with assistant care,The groaning hero to his chariot bear;His foaming coursers,
swifter than the wind,Speed to the town, and leave the war behind.When now they
touch’d the mead’s enamell’d side,Where gentle Xanthus rolls his easy tide,With
watery drops the chief they sprinkle round,Placed on the margin of the flowery
ground.Raised on his knees, he now ejects the gore;Now faints anew, low-sinking
on the shore;By fits he breathes, half views the fleeting skies,And seals again,
by fits, his swimming eyes.Soon as the Greeks the chief’s retreat beheld,With
double fury each invades the field.Oilean Ajax first his javelin sped,Pierced by
whose point the son of Enops bled;(Satnius the brave, whom beauteous Neis
boreAmidst her flocks on Satnio’s silver shore;)Struck through the belly’s rim,
the warrior liesSupine, and shades eternal veil his eyes.An arduous battle rose
around the dead;By turns the Greeks, by turns the Trojans bled.Fired with
revenge, Polydamas drew near,And at Prothoënor shook the trembling spear;The
driving javelin through his shoulder thrust,He sinks to earth, and grasps the
bloody dust.“Lo thus (the victor cries) we rule the field,And thus their arms
the race of Panthus wield:From this unerring hand there flies no dartBut bathes
its point within a Grecian heart.Propp’d on that spear to which thou owest thy
fall,Go, guide thy darksome steps to Pluto’s dreary hall.”He said, and sorrow
touch’d each Argive breast:The soul of Ajax burn’d above the rest.As by his side
the groaning warrior fell,At the fierce foe he launch’d his piercing steel;The
foe, reclining, shunn’d the flying death;But fate, Archilochus, demands thy
breath:Thy lofty birth no succour could impart,The wings of death o’ertook thee
on the dart;Swift to perform heaven’s fatal will, it fledFull on the juncture of
the neck and head,And took the joint, and cut the nerves in twain:The dropping
head first tumbled on the plain.So just the stroke, that yet the body
stoodErect, then roll’d along the sands in blood.“Here, proud Polydamas, here
turn thy eyes!(The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries:)Say, is this chief
extended on the plainA worthy vengeance for Prothoënor slain?Mark well his port!
his figure and his faceNor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar race;Some lines,
methinks, may make his lineage known,Antenor’s brother, or perhaps his son.”He
spake, and smiled severe, for well he knewThe bleeding youth: Troy sadden’d at
the view.But furious Acamas avenged his cause;As Promachus his slaughtered
brother draws,He pierced his heart—“Such fate attends you all,Proud Argives!
destined by our arms to fall.Not Troy alone, but haughty Greece, shall shareThe
toils, the sorrows, and the wounds of war.Behold your Promachus deprived of
breath,A victim owed to my brave brother’s death.Not unappeased he enters
Pluto’s gate,Who leaves a brother to revenge his fate.”Heart-piercing anguish
struck the Grecian host,But touch’d the breast of bold Peneleus most;At the
proud boaster he directs his course;The boaster flies, and shuns superior
force.But young Ilioneus received the spear;Ilioneus, his father’s only
care:(Phorbas the rich, of all the Trojan trainWhom Hermes loved, and taught the
arts of gain:)Full in his eye the weapon chanced to fall,And from the fibres
scoop’d the rooted ball,Drove through the neck, and hurl’d him to the plain;He
lifts his miserable arms in vain!Swift his broad falchion fierce Peneleus
spread,And from the spouting shoulders struck his head;To earth at once the head
and helmet fly;The lance, yet sticking through the bleeding eye,The victor
seized; and, as aloft he shookThe gory visage, thus insulting spoke:“Trojans!
your great Ilioneus behold!Haste, to his father let the tale be told:Let his
high roofs resound with frantic woe,Such as the house of Promachus must know;Let
doleful tidings greet his mother’s ear,Such as to Promachus’ sad spouse we
bear,When we victorious shall to Greece return,And the pale matron in our
triumphs mourn.”Dreadful he spoke, then toss’d the head on high;The Trojans
hear, they tremble, and they fly:Aghast they gaze around the fleet and wall,And
dread the ruin that impends on all.Daughters of Jove! that on Olympus shine,Ye
all-beholding, all-recording nine!O say, when Neptune made proud Ilion
yield,What chief, what hero first embrued the field?Of all the Grecians what
immortal name,And whose bless’d trophies, will ye raise to fame?Thou first,
great Ajax! on the unsanguined plainLaid Hyrtius, leader of the Mysian
train.Phalces and Mermer, Nestor’s son o’erthrew,Bold Merion, Morys and
Hippotion slew.Strong Periphaetes and Prothoon bled,By Teucer’s arrows mingled
with the dead,Pierced in the flank by Menelaus’ steel,His people’s pastor,
Hyperenor fell;Eternal darkness wrapp’d the warrior round,And the fierce soul
came rushing through the wound.But stretch’d in heaps before Oïleus’ son,Fall
mighty numbers, mighty numbers run;Ajax the less, of all the Grecian raceSkill’d
in pursuit, and swiftest in the chase.[Illustration: ] BACCHUSBOOK
XV.ARGUMENT.THE FIFTH BATTLE AT THE SHIPS; AND THE ACTS OF AJAX.Jupiter,
awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hectorin a swoon, and
Neptune at the head of the Greeks: he is highlyincensed at the artifice of Juno,
who appeases him by her submissions;she is then sent to Iris and Apollo. Juno,
repairing to the assembly ofthe gods, attempts, with extraordinary address, to
incense them againstJupiter; in particular she touches Mars with a violent
resentment; heis ready to take arms, but is prevented by Minerva. Iris and
Apolloobey the orders of Jupiter; Iris commands Neptune to leave the battle,to
which, after much reluctance and passion, he consents. Apolloreinspires Hector
with vigour, brings him back to the battle, marchesbefore him with his ægis, and
turns the fortune of the fight. Hebreaks down great part of the Grecian wall:
the Trojans rush in, andattempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are, as
yet, repelledby the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter.Now in swift flight
they pass the trench profound,And many a chief lay gasping on the ground:Then
stopp’d and panted, where the chariots lieFear on their cheek, and horror in
their eye.Meanwhile, awaken’d from his dream of love,On Ida’s summit sat
imperial Jove:Round the wide fields he cast a careful view,There saw the Trojans
fly, the Greeks pursue;These proud in arms, those scatter’d o’er the plainAnd,
’midst the war, the monarch of the main.Not far, great Hector on the dust he
spies,(His sad associates round with weeping eyes,)Ejecting blood, and panting
yet for breath,His senses wandering to the verge of death.The god beheld him
with a pitying look,And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke:“O thou, still
adverse to the eternal will,For ever studious in promoting ill!Thy arts have
made the godlike Hector yield,And driven his conquering squadrons from the
field.Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, withstandOur power immense, and brave
the almighty hand?Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fix’d on high,From the vast
concave of the spangled sky,I hung thee trembling in a golden chain,And all the
raging gods opposed in vain?Headlong I hurl’d them from the Olympian
hall,Stunn’d in the whirl, and breathless with the fall.For godlike Hercules
these deeds were done,Nor seem’d the vengeance worthy such a son:When, by thy
wiles induced, fierce Boreas toss’dThe shipwreck’d hero on the Coan coast,Him
through a thousand forms of death I bore,And sent to Argos, and his native
shore.Hear this, remember, and our fury dread,Nor pull the unwilling vengeance
on thy head;Lest arts and blandishments successless prove,Thy soft deceits, and
well-dissembled love.”The Thunderer spoke: imperial Juno mourn’d,And, trembling,
these submissive words return’d:“By every oath that powers immortal ties,The
foodful earth and all-infolding skies;By thy black waves, tremendous Styx! that
flowThrough the drear realms of gliding ghosts below;By the dread honours of thy
sacred head,And that unbroken vow, our virgin bed!Not by my arts the ruler of
the mainSteeps Troy in blood, and ranges round the plain:By his own ardour, his
own pity sway’d,To help his Greeks, he fought and disobey’d:Else had thy Juno
better counsels given,And taught submission to the sire of heaven.”“Think’st
thou with me? fair empress of the skies!(The immortal father with a smile
replies;)Then soon the haughty sea-god shall obey,Nor dare to act but when we
point the way.If truth inspires thy tongue, proclaim our willTo yon bright synod
on the Olympian hill;Our high decree let various Iris know,And call the god that
bears the silver bow.Let her descend, and from the embattled plainCommand the
sea-god to his watery reign:While Phœbus hastes great Hector to prepareTo rise
afresh, and once more wake the war:His labouring bosom re-inspires with
breath,And calls his senses from the verge of death.Greece chased by Troy, even
to Achilles’ fleet,Shall fall by thousands at the hero’s feet.He, not untouch’d
with pity, to the plainShall send Patroclus, but shall send in vain.What youths
he slaughters under Ilion’s walls!Even my loved son, divine Sarpedon,
falls!Vanquish’d at last by Hector’s lance he lies.Then, nor till then, shall
great Achilles rise:And lo! that instant, godlike Hector dies.From that great
hour the war’s whole fortune turns,Pallas assists, and lofty Ilion burns.Not
till that day shall Jove relax his rage,Nor one of all the heavenly host
engageIn aid of Greece. The promise of a godI gave, and seal’d it with the
almighty nod,Achilles’ glory to the stars to raise;Such was our word, and fate
the word obeys.”The trembling queen (the almighty order given)Swift from the
Idaean summit shot to heaven.As some wayfaring man, who wanders o’erIn thought a
length of lands he trod before,Sends forth his active mind from place to
place,Joins hill to dale, and measures space with space:So swift flew Juno to
the bless’d abodes,If thought of man can match the speed of gods.There sat the
powers in awful synod placed;They bow’d, and made obeisance as she pass’dThrough
all the brazen dome:[239] with goblets crown’dThey hail her queen; the nectar
streams around.Fair Themis first presents the golden bowl,And anxious asks what
cares disturb her soul?To whom the white-arm’d goddess thus replies:“Enough thou
know’st the tyrant of the skies,Severely bent his purpose to fulfil,Unmoved his
mind, and unrestrain’d his will.Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy
call;Bid the crown’d nectar circle round the hall:But Jove shall thunder through
the ethereal domeSuch stern decrees, such threaten’d woes to come,As soon shall
freeze mankind with dire surprise,And damp the eternal banquets of the
skies.”The goddess said, and sullen took her place;Black horror sadden’d each
celestial face.To see the gathering grudge in every breast,Smiles on her lips a
spleenful joy express’d;While on her wrinkled front, and eyebrow bent,Sat
stedfast care, and lowering discontent.Thus she proceeds—“Attend, ye powers
above!But know, ’tis madness to contest with Jove:Supreme he sits; and sees, in
pride of sway.Your vassal godheads grudgingly obey:Fierce in the majesty of
power controls;Shakes all the thrones of heaven, and bends the poles.Submiss,
immortals! all he wills, obey:And thou, great Mars, begin and show the
way.Behold Ascalaphus! behold him die,But dare not murmur, dare not vent a
sigh;Thy own loved boasted offspring lies o’erthrown,If that loved boasted
offspring be thy own.”Stern Mars, with anguish for his slaughter’d son,Smote his
rebelling breast, and fierce begun:“Thus then, immortals! thus shall Mars
obey;Forgive me, gods, and yield my vengeance way:Descending first to yon
forbidden plain,The god of battles dares avenge the slain;Dares, though the
thunder bursting o’er my headShould hurl me blazing on those heaps of dead.”With
that he gives command to Fear and FlightTo join his rapid coursers for the
fight:Then grim in arms, with hasty vengeance flies;Arms that reflect a radiance
through the skies.And now had Jove, by bold rebellion driven,Discharged his
wrath on half the host of heaven;But Pallas, springing through the bright
abode,Starts from her azure throne to calm the god.Struck for the immortal race
with timely fear,From frantic Mars she snatch’d the shield and spear;Then the
huge helmet lifting from his head,Thus to the impetuous homicide she said:“By
what wild passion, furious! art thou toss’d?Striv’st thou with Jove? thou art
already lost.Shall not the Thunderer’s dread command restrain,And was imperial
Juno heard in vain?Back to the skies wouldst thou with shame be driven,And in
thy guilt involve the host of heaven?Ilion and Greece no more should Jove
engage,The skies would yield an ampler scene of rage;Guilty and guiltless find
an equal fateAnd one vast ruin whelm the Olympian state.Cease then thy
offspring’s death unjust to call;Heroes as great have died, and yet shall
fall.Why should heaven’s law with foolish man complyExempted from the race
ordain’d to die?”This menace fix’d the warrior to his throne;Sullen he sat, and
curb’d the rising groan.Then Juno call’d (Jove’s orders to obey)The winged Iris,
and the god of day.“Go wait the Thunderer’s will (Saturnia cried)On yon tall
summit of the fountful Ide:There in the father’s awful presence stand,Receive,
and execute his dread command.”She said, and sat; the god that gilds the day,And
various Iris, wing their airy way.Swift as the wind, to Ida’s hills they
came,(Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game)There sat the eternal; he
whose nod controlsThe trembling world, and shakes the steady poles.Veil’d in a
mist of fragrance him they found,With clouds of gold and purple circled
round.Well-pleased the Thunderer saw their earnest care,And prompt obedience to
the queen of air;Then (while a smile serenes his awful brow)Commands the goddess
of the showery bow:“Iris! descend, and what we here ordain,Report to yon mad
tyrant of the main.Bid him from fight to his own deeps repair,Or breathe from
slaughter in the fields of air.If he refuse, then let him timely weighOur elder
birthright, and superior sway.How shall his rashness stand the dire alarms,If
heaven’s omnipotence descend in arms?Strives he with me, by whom his power was
given,And is there equal to the lord of heaven?”The all-mighty spoke; the
goddess wing’d her flightTo sacred Ilion from the Idaean height.Swift as the
rattling hail, or fleecy snows,Drive through the skies, when Boreas fiercely
blows;So from the clouds descending Iris falls,And to blue Neptune thus the
goddess calls:“Attend the mandate of the sire above!In me behold the messenger
of Jove:He bids thee from forbidden wars repairTo thine own deeps, or to the
fields of air.This if refused, he bids thee timely weighHis elder birthright,
and superior sway.How shall thy rashness stand the dire alarmsIf heaven’s
omnipotence descend in arms?Striv’st thou with him by whom all power is
given?And art thou equal to the lord of heaven?”“What means the haughty
sovereign of the skies?(The king of ocean thus, incensed, replies;)Rule as he
will his portion’d realms on high;No vassal god, nor of his train, am I.Three
brother deities from Saturn came,And ancient Rhea, earth’s immortal
dame:Assign’d by lot, our triple rule we know;Infernal Pluto sways the shades
below;O’er the wide clouds, and o’er the starry plain,Ethereal Jove extends his
high domain;My court beneath the hoary waves I keep,And hush the roarings of the
sacred deep;Olympus, and this earth, in common lie:What claim has here the
tyrant of the sky?Far in the distant clouds let him control,And awe the younger
brothers of the pole;There to his children his commands be given,The trembling,
servile, second race of heaven.”“And must I then (said she), O sire of
floods!Bear this fierce answer to the king of gods?Correct it yet, and change
thy rash intent;A noble mind disdains not to repent.To elder brothers guardian
fiends are given,To scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven.”“Great is the
profit (thus the god rejoin’d)When ministers are blest with prudent mind:Warn’d
by thy words, to powerful Jove I yield,And quit, though angry, the contended
field:Not but his threats with justice I disclaim,The same our honours, and our
birth the same.If yet, forgetful of his promise givenTo Hermes, Pallas, and the
queen of heaven,To favour Ilion, that perfidious place,He breaks his faith with
half the ethereal race;Give him to know, unless the Grecian trainLay yon proud
structures level with the plain,Howe’er the offence by other gods be pass’d,The
wrath of Neptune shall for ever last.”Thus speaking, furious from the field he
strode,And plunged into the bosom of the flood.The lord of thunders, from his
lofty heightBeheld, and thus bespoke the source of light:“Behold! the god whose
liquid arms are hurl’dAround the globe, whose earthquakes rock the world,Desists
at length his rebel-war to wage,Seeks his own seas, and trembles at our
rage;Else had my wrath, heaven’s thrones all shaking round,Burn’d to the bottom
of his seas profound;And all the gods that round old Saturn dwellHad heard the
thunders to the deeps of hell.Well was the crime, and well the vengeance
spared;Even power immense had found such battle hard.Go thou, my son! the
trembling Greeks alarm,Shake my broad ægis on thy active arm,Be godlike Hector
thy peculiar care,Swell his bold heart, and urge his strength to war:Let Ilion
conquer, till the Achaian trainFly to their ships and Hellespont again:Then
Greece shall breathe from toils.” The godhead said;His will divine the son of
Jove obey’d.Not half so swift the sailing falcon flies,That drives a turtle
through the liquid skies,As Phœbus, shooting from the Idaean brow,Glides down
the mountain to the plain below.There Hector seated by the stream he sees,His
sense returning with the coming breeze;Again his pulses beat, his spirits
rise;Again his loved companions meet his eyes;Jove thinking of his pains, they
pass’d away,To whom the god who gives the golden day:“Why sits great Hector from
the field so far?What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?”The
fainting hero, as the vision brightStood shining o’er him, half unseal’d his
sight:“What blest immortal, with commanding breath,Thus wakens Hector from the
sleep of death?Has fame not told, how, while my trusty swordBathed Greece in
slaughter, and her battle gored,The mighty Ajax with a deadly blowHad almost
sunk me to the shades below?Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy,And
hell’s black horrors swim before my eye.”To him Apollo: “Be no more
dismay’d;See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid.Behold! thy Phœbus
shall his arms employ,Phœbus, propitious still to thee and Troy.Inspire thy
warriors then with manly force,And to the ships impel thy rapid horse:Even I
will make thy fiery coursers way,And drive the Grecians headlong to the
sea.”Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove,And breathed immortal ardour from
above.As when the pamper’d steed, with reins unbound,Breaks from his stall, and
pours along the ground;With ample strokes he rushes to the flood,To bathe his
sides, and cool his fiery blood;His head, now freed, he tosses to the skies;His
mane dishevell’d o’er his shoulders flies:He snuffs the females in the
well-known plain,And springs, exulting, to his fields again:Urged by the voice
divine, thus Hector flew,Full of the god; and all his hosts pursue.As when the
force of men and dogs combinedInvade the mountain goat, or branching hind;Far
from the hunter’s rage secure they lieClose in the rock, (not fated yet to
die)When lo! a lion shoots across the way!They fly: at once the chasers and the
prey.So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued,And mark’d their progress
through the ranks in blood,Soon as they see the furious chief appear,Forget to
vanquish, and consent to fear.Thoas with grief observed his dreadful
course,Thoas, the bravest of the Ætolian force;Skill’d to direct the javelin’s
distant flight,And bold to combat in the standing fight,Not more in councils
famed for solid sense,Than winning words and heavenly eloquence.“Gods! what
portent (he cried) these eyes invades?Lo! Hector rises from the Stygian
shades!We saw him, late, by thundering Ajax kill’d:What god restores him to the
frighted field;And not content that half of Greece lie slain,Pours new
destruction on her sons again?He comes not, Jove! without thy powerful will;Lo!
still he lives, pursues, and conquers still!Yet hear my counsel, and his worst
withstand:The Greeks’ main body to the fleet command;But let the few whom
brisker spirits warm,Stand the first onset, and provoke the storm.Thus point
your arms; and when such foes appear,Fierce as he is, let Hector learn to
fear.”The warrior spoke; the listening Greeks obey,Thickening their ranks, and
form a deep array.Each Ajax, Teucer, Merion gave command,The valiant leader of
the Cretan band;And Mars-like Meges: these the chiefs excite,Approach the foe,
and meet the coming fight.Behind, unnumber’d multitudes attend,To flank the
navy, and the shores defend.Full on the front the pressing Trojans bear,And
Hector first came towering to the war.Phœbus himself the rushing battle led;A
veil of clouds involved his radiant head:High held before him, Jove’s enormous
shieldPortentous shone, and shaded all the field;Vulcan to Jove the immortal
gift consign’d,To scatter hosts and terrify mankind,The Greeks expect the shock,
the clamours riseFrom different parts, and mingle in the skies.Dire was the hiss
of darts, by heroes flung,And arrows leaping from the bow-string sung;These
drink the life of generous warriors slain:Those guiltless fall, and thirst for
blood in vain.As long as Phœbus bore unmoved the shield,Sat doubtful conquest
hovering o’er the field;But when aloft he shakes it in the skies,Shouts in their
ears, and lightens in their eyes,Deep horror seizes every Grecian breast,Their
force is humbled, and their fear confess’d.So flies a herd of oxen, scatter’d
wide,No swain to guard them, and no day to guide,When two fell lions from the
mountain come,And spread the carnage through the shady gloom.Impending Phœbus
pours around them fear,And Troy and Hector thunder in the rear.Heaps fall on
heaps: the slaughter Hector leads,First great Arcesilas, then Stichius
bleeds;One to the bold Bœotians ever dear,And one Menestheus’ friend and famed
compeer.Medon and Iasus, Æneas sped;This sprang from Phelus, and the Athenians
led;But hapless Medon from Oïleus came;Him Ajax honour’d with a brother’s
name,Though born of lawless love: from home expell’d,A banish’d man, in Phylacè
he dwell’d,Press’d by the vengeance of an angry wife;Troy ends at last his
labours and his life.Mecystes next Polydamas o’erthrew;And thee, brave Clonius,
great Agenor slew.By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies,Pierced through the
shoulder as he basely flies.Polites’ arm laid Echius on the plain;Stretch’d on
one heap, the victors spoil the slain.The Greeks dismay’d, confused, disperse or
fall,Some seek the trench, some skulk behind the wall.While these fly trembling,
others pant for breath,And o’er the slaughter stalks gigantic death.On rush’d
bold Hector, gloomy as the night;Forbids to plunder, animates the fight,Points
to the fleet: “For, by the gods! who flies,[240]Who dares but linger, by this
hand he dies;No weeping sister his cold eye shall close,No friendly hand his
funeral pyre compose.Who stops to plunder at this signal hour,The birds shall
tear him, and the dogs devour.”Furious he said; the smarting scourge
resounds;The coursers fly; the smoking chariot bounds;The hosts rush on; loud
clamours shake the shore;The horses thunder, earth and ocean roar!Apollo,
planted at the trench’s bound,Push’d at the bank: down sank the enormous
mound:Roll’d in the ditch the heapy ruin lay;A sudden road! a long and ample
way.O’er the dread fosse (a late impervious space)Now steeds, and men, and cars
tumultuous pass.The wondering crowds the downward level trod;Before them flamed
the shield, and march’d the god.Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall;And
lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall:Easy as when ashore an infant stands,And
draws imagined houses in the sands;The sportive wanton, pleased with some new
play,Sweeps the slight works and fashion’d domes away:Thus vanish’d at thy
touch, the towers and walls;The toil of thousands in a moment falls.The Grecians
gaze around with wild despair,Confused, and weary all the powers with
prayer:Exhort their men, with praises, threats, commands;And urge the gods, with
voices, eyes, and hands.Experienced Nestor chief obtests the skies,And weeps his
country with a father’s eyes.“O Jove! if ever, on his native shore,One Greek
enrich’d thy shrine with offer’d gore;If e’er, in hope our country to behold,We
paid the fattest firstlings of the fold;If e’er thou sign’st our wishes with thy
nod:Perform the promise of a gracious god!This day preserve our navies from the
flame,And save the relics of the Grecian name.”Thus prayed the sage: the eternal
gave consent,And peals of thunder shook the firmament.Presumptuous Troy mistook
the accepting sign,And catch’d new fury at the voice divine.As, when black
tempests mix the seas and skies,The roaring deeps in watery mountains rise,Above
the sides of some tall ship ascend,Its womb they deluge, and its ribs they
rend:Thus loudly roaring, and o’erpowering all,Mount the thick Trojans up the
Grecian wall;Legions on legions from each side arise:Thick sound the keels; the
storm of arrows flies.Fierce on the ships above, the cars below,These wield the
mace, and those the javelin throw.While thus the thunder of the battle raged,And
labouring armies round the works engaged,Still in the tent Patroclus sat to
tendThe good Eurypylus, his wounded friend.He sprinkles healing balms, to
anguish kind,And adds discourse, the medicine of the mind.But when he saw,
ascending up the fleet,Victorious Troy; then, starting from his seat,With bitter
groans his sorrows he express’d,He wrings his hands, he beats his manly
breast.“Though yet thy state require redress (he cries)Depart I must: what
horrors strike my eyes!Charged with Achilles’ high command I go,A mournful
witness of this scene of woe;I haste to urge him by his country’s careTo rise in
arms, and shine again in war.Perhaps some favouring god his soul may bend;The
voice is powerful of a faithful friend.”He spoke; and, speaking, swifter than
the windSprung from the tent, and left the war behind.The embodied Greeks the
fierce attack sustain,But strive, though numerous, to repulse in vain:Nor could
the Trojans, through that firm array,Force to the fleet and tents the impervious
way.As when a shipwright, with Palladian art,Smooths the rough wood, and levels
every part;With equal hand he guides his whole design,By the just rule, and the
directing line:The martial leaders, with like skill and care,Preserved their
line, and equal kept the war.Brave deeds of arms through all the ranks were
tried,And every ship sustained an equal tide.At one proud bark, high-towering
o’er the fleet,Ajax the great, and godlike Hector meet;For one bright prize the
matchless chiefs contend,Nor this the ships can fire, nor that defend:One kept
the shore, and one the vessel trod;That fix’d as fate, this acted by a god.The
son of Clytius in his daring hand,The deck approaching, shakes a flaming
brand;But, pierced by Telamon’s huge lance, expires:Thundering he falls, and
drops the extinguish’d fires.Great Hector view’d him with a sad survey,As
stretch’d in dust before the stern he lay.“Oh! all of Trojan, all of Lycian
race!Stand to your arms, maintain this arduous space:Lo! where the son of royal
Clytius lies;Ah, save his arms, secure his obsequies!”This said, his eager
javelin sought the foe:But Ajax shunn’d the meditated blow.Not vainly yet the
forceful lance was thrown;It stretch’d in dust unhappy Lycophron:An exile long,
sustain’d at Ajax’ board,A faithful servant to a foreign lord;In peace, and war,
for ever at his side,Near his loved master, as he lived, he died.From the high
poop he tumbles on the sand,And lies a lifeless load along the land.With anguish
Ajax views the piercing sight,And thus inflames his brother to the
fight:“Teucer, behold! extended on the shoreOur friend, our loved companion! now
no more!Dear as a parent, with a parent’s careTo fight our wars he left his
native air.This death deplored, to Hector’s rage we owe;Revenge, revenge it on
the cruel foe.Where are those darts on which the fates attend?And where the bow
which Phœbus taught to bend?”Impatient Teucer, hastening to his aid,Before the
chief his ample bow display’d;The well-stored quiver on his shoulders hung:Then
hiss’d his arrow, and the bowstring sung.Clytus, Pisenor’s son, renown’d in
fame,(To thee, Polydamas! an honour’d name)Drove through the thickest of the
embattled plainsThe startling steeds, and shook his eager reins.As all on glory
ran his ardent mind,The pointed death arrests him from behind:Through his fair
neck the thrilling arrow flies;In youth’s first bloom reluctantly he dies.Hurl’d
from the lofty seat, at distance far,The headlong coursers spurn his empty
car;Till sad Polydamas the steeds restrain’d,And gave, Astynous, to thy careful
hand;Then, fired to vengeance, rush’d amidst the foe:Rage edged his sword, and
strengthen’d every blow.Once more bold Teucer, in his country’s cause,At
Hector’s breast a chosen arrow draws:And had the weapon found the destined
way,Thy fall, great Trojan! had renown’d that day.But Hector was not doom’d to
perish then:The all-wise disposer of the fates of men(Imperial Jove) his present
death withstands;Nor was such glory due to Teucer’s hands.At its full stretch as
the tough string he drew,Struck by an arm unseen, it burst in two;Down dropp’d
the bow: the shaft with brazen headFell innocent, and on the dust lay dead.The
astonish’d archer to great Ajax cries;“Some god prevents our destined
enterprise:Some god, propitious to the Trojan foe,Has, from my arm unfailing,
struck the bow,And broke the nerve my hands had twined with art,Strong to impel
the flight of many a dart.”“Since heaven commands it (Ajax made reply)Dismiss
the bow, and lay thy arrows by:Thy arms no less suffice the lance to wield,And
quit the quiver for the ponderous shield.In the first ranks indulge thy thirst
of fame,Thy brave example shall the rest inflame.Fierce as they are, by long
successes vain;To force our fleet, or even a ship to gain,Asks toil, and sweat,
and blood: their utmost mightShall find its match—No more: ’tis ours to
fight.”Then Teucer laid his faithless bow aside;The fourfold buckler o’er his
shoulder tied;On his brave head a crested helm he placed,With nodding horse-hair
formidably graced;A dart, whose point with brass refulgent shines,The warrior
wields; and his great brother joins.This Hector saw, and thus express’d his
joy:“Ye troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy!Be mindful of yourselves, your
ancient fame,And spread your glory with the navy’s flame.Jove is with us; I saw
his hand, but now,From the proud archer strike his vaunted bow:Indulgent Jove!
how plain thy favours shine,When happy nations bear the marks divine!How easy
then, to see the sinking stateOf realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!Such is
the fate of Greece, and such is ours:Behold, ye warriors, and exert your
powers.Death is the worst; a fate which all must try;And for our country, ’tis a
bliss to die.The gallant man, though slain in fight he be,Yet leaves his nation
safe, his children free;Entails a debt on all the grateful state;His own brave
friends shall glory in his fate;His wife live honour’d, all his race succeed,And
late posterity enjoy the deed!”This roused the soul in every Trojan breast:The
godlike Ajax next his Greeks address’d:“How long, ye warriors of the Argive
race,(To generous Argos what a dire disgrace!)How long on these cursed confines
will ye lie,Yet undetermined, or to live or die?What hopes remain, what methods
to retire,If once your vessels catch the Trojan fire?Mark how the flames
approach, how near they fall,How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his call!Not to
the dance that dreadful voice invites,It calls to death, and all the rage of
fights.’Tis now no time for wisdom or debates;To your own hands are trusted all
your fates;And better far in one decisive strife,One day should end our labour
or our life,Than keep this hard-got inch of barren sands,Still press’d, and
press’d by such inglorious hands.”The listening Grecians feel their leader’s
flame,And every kindling bosom pants for fame.Then mutual slaughters spread on
either side;By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died;There, pierced by Ajax,
sunk Laodamas,Chief of the foot, of old Antenor’s race.Polydamas laid Otus on
the sand,The fierce commander of the Epeian band.His lance bold Meges at the
victor threw;The victor, stooping, from the death withdrew;(That valued life, O
Phœbus! was thy care)But Croesmus’ bosom took the flying spear:His corpse fell
bleeding on the slippery shore;His radiant arms triumphant Meges bore.Dolops,
the son of Lampus, rushes on,Sprung from the race of old Laomedon,And famed for
prowess in a well-fought field,He pierced the centre of his sounding shield:But
Meges, Phyleus’ ample breastplate wore,(Well-known in fight on Sellè’s winding
shore;For king Euphetes gave the golden mail,Compact, and firm with many a
jointed scale)Which oft, in cities storm’d, and battles won,Had saved the
father, and now saves the son.Full at the Trojan’s head he urged his lance,Where
the high plumes above the helmet dance,New ting’d with Tyrian dye: in dust
below,Shorn from the crest, the purple honours glow.Meantime their fight the
Spartan king survey’d,And stood by Meges’ side a sudden aid.Through Dolops’
shoulder urged his forceful dart,Which held its passage through the panting
heart,And issued at his breast. With thundering soundThe warrior falls, extended
on the ground.In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain:But Hector’s
voice excites his kindred train;The hero most, from Hicetaon sprung,Fierce
Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young.He (ere to Troy the Grecians cross’d the
main)Fed his large oxen on Percotè’s plain;But when oppress’d, his country
claim’d his care,Return’d to Ilion, and excell’d in war;For this, in Priam’s
court, he held his place,Beloved no less than Priam’s royal race.Him Hector
singled, as his troops he led,And thus inflamed him, pointing to the dead.“Lo,
Melanippus! lo, where Dolops lies;And is it thus our royal kinsman
dies?O’ermatch’d he falls; to two at once a prey,And lo! they bear the bloody
arms away!Come on—a distant war no longer wage,But hand to hand thy country’s
foes engage:Till Greece at once, and all her glory end;Or Ilion from her towery
height descend,Heaved from the lowest stone; and bury allIn one sad sepulchre,
one common fall.”Hector (this said) rush’d forward on the foes:With equal ardour
Melanippus glows:Then Ajax thus—“O Greeks! respect your fame,Respect yourselves,
and learn an honest shame:Let mutual reverence mutual warmth inspire,And catch
from breast to breast the noble fire,On valour’s side the odds of combat lie;The
brave live glorious, or lamented die;The wretch that trembles in the field of
fame,Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame.”His generous sense he not
in vain imparts;It sunk, and rooted in the Grecian hearts:They join, they
throng, they thicken at his call,And flank the navy with a brazen wall;Shields
touching shields, in order blaze above,And stop the Trojans, though impell’d by
Jove.The fiery Spartan first, with loud applause.Warms the bold son of Nestor in
his cause.“Is there (he said) in arms a youth like you,So strong to fight, so
active to pursue?Why stand you distant, nor attempt a deed?Lift the bold lance,
and make some Trojan bleed.”He said; and backward to the lines retired;Forth
rush’d the youth with martial fury fired,Beyond the foremost ranks; his lance he
threw,And round the black battalions cast his view.The troops of Troy recede
with sudden fear,While the swift javelin hiss’d along in air.Advancing
Melanippus met the dartWith his bold breast, and felt it in his heart:Thundering
he falls; his falling arms resound,And his broad buckler rings against the
ground.The victor leaps upon his prostrate prize:Thus on a roe the well-breath’d
beagle flies,And rends his side, fresh-bleeding with the dartThe distant hunter
sent into his heart.Observing Hector to the rescue flew;Bold as he was,
Antilochus withdrew.So when a savage, ranging o’er the plain,Has torn the
shepherd’s dog, or shepherd’s swain,While conscious of the deed, he glares
around,And hears the gathering multitude resound,Timely he flies the
yet-untasted food,And gains the friendly shelter of the wood:So fears the youth;
all Troy with shouts pursue,While stones and darts in mingled tempest flew;But
enter’d in the Grecian ranks, he turnsHis manly breast, and with new fury
burns.Now on the fleet the tides of Trojans drove,Fierce to fulfil the stern
decrees of Jove:The sire of gods, confirming Thetis’ prayer,The Grecian ardour
quench’d in deep despair;But lifts to glory Troy’s prevailing bands,Swells all
their hearts, and strengthens all their hands.On Ida’s top he waits with longing
eyes,To view the navy blazing to the skies;Then, nor till then, the scale of war
shall turn,The Trojans fly, and conquer’d Ilion burn.These fates revolved in his
almighty mind,He raises Hector to the work design’d,Bids him with more than
mortal fury glow,And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe.So Mars, when
human crimes for vengeance call,Shakes his huge javelin, and whole armies
fall.Not with more rage a conflagration rolls,Wraps the vast mountains, and
involves the poles.He foams with wrath; beneath his gloomy browLike fiery
meteors his red eye-balls glow:The radiant helmet on his temple burns,Waves when
he nods, and lightens as he turns:For Jove his splendour round the chief had
thrown,And cast the blaze of both the hosts on one.Unhappy glories! for his fate
was near,Due to stern Pallas, and Pelides’ spear:Yet Jove deferr’d the death he
was to pay,And gave what fate allow’d, the honours of a day!Now all on fire for
fame, his breast, his eyesBurn at each foe, and single every prize;Still at the
closest ranks, the thickest fight,He points his ardour, and exerts his might.The
Grecian phalanx, moveless as a tower,On all sides batter’d, yet resists his
power:So some tall rock o’erhangs the hoary main,[241]By winds assail’d, by
billows beat in vain,Unmoved it hears, above, the tempest blow,And sees the
watery mountains break below.Girt in surrounding flames, he seems to fallLike
fire from Jove, and bursts upon them all:Bursts as a wave that from the cloud
impends,And, swell’d with tempests, on the ship descends;White are the decks
with foam; the winds aloudHowl o’er the masts, and sing through every
shroud:Pale, trembling, tired, the sailors freeze with fears;And instant death
on every wave appears.So pale the Greeks the eyes of Hector meet,The chief so
thunders, and so shakes the fleet.As when a lion, rushing from his den,Amidst
the plain of some wide-water’d fen,(Where numerous oxen, as at ease they feed,At
large expatiate o’er the ranker mead)Leaps on the herds before the herdsman’s
eyes;The trembling herdsman far to distance flies;Some lordly bull (the rest
dispersed and fled)He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead.Thus from the rage
of Jove-like Hector flewAll Greece in heaps; but one he seized, and
slew:Mycenian Periphes, a mighty name,In wisdom great, in arms well known to
fame;The minister of stern Eurystheus’ ireAgainst Alcides, Copreus was his
sire:The son redeem’d the honours of the race,A son as generous as the sire was
base;O’er all his country’s youth conspicuous farIn every virtue, or of peace or
war:But doom’d to Hector’s stronger force to yield!Against the margin of his
ample shieldHe struck his hasty foot: his heels up-sprung;Supine he fell; his
brazen helmet rung.On the fallen chief the invading Trojan press’d,And plunged
the pointed javelin in his breast.His circling friends, who strove to guard too
lateThe unhappy hero, fled, or shared his fate.Chased from the foremost line,
the Grecian trainNow man the next, receding toward the main:Wedged in one body
at the tents they stand,Wall’d round with sterns, a gloomy, desperate band.Now
manly shame forbids the inglorious flight;Now fear itself confines them to the
fight:Man courage breathes in man; but Nestor most(The sage preserver of the
Grecian host)Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost shores;And by their
parents, by themselves implores.“Oh friends! be men: your generous breasts
inflameWith mutual honour, and with mutual shame!Think of your hopes, your
fortunes; all the careYour wives, your infants, and your parents share:Think of
each living father’s reverend head;Think of each ancestor with glory
dead;Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue,They ask their safety, and their
fame, from you:The gods their fates on this one action lay,And all are lost, if
you desert the day.”He spoke, and round him breathed heroic fires;Minerva
seconds what the sage inspires.The mist of darkness Jove around them threwShe
clear’d, restoring all the war to view;A sudden ray shot beaming o’er the
plain,And show’d the shores, the navy, and the main:Hector they saw, and all who
fly, or fight,The scene wide-opening to the blaze of light,First of the field
great Ajax strikes their eyes,His port majestic, and his ample size:A ponderous
mace with studs of iron crown’d,Full twenty cubits long, he swings around;Nor
fights, like others, fix’d to certain standsBut looks a moving tower above the
bands;High on the decks with vast gigantic stride,The godlike hero stalks from
side to side.So when a horseman from the watery mead(Skill’d in the manage of
the bounding steed)Drives four fair coursers, practised to obey,To some great
city through the public way;Safe in his art, as side by side they run,He shifts
his seat, and vaults from one to one;And now to this, and now to that he
flies;Admiring numbers follow with their eyes.From ship to ship thus Ajax
swiftly flew,No less the wonder of the warring crew.As furious, Hector thunder’d
threats aloud,And rush’d enraged before the Trojan crowd;Then swift invades the
ships, whose beaky proresLay rank’d contiguous on the bending shores;So the
strong eagle from his airy height,Who marks the swans’ or cranes’ embodied
flight,Stoops down impetuous, while they light for food,And, stooping, darkens
with his wings the flood.Jove leads him on with his almighty hand,And breathes
fierce spirits in his following band.The warring nations meet, the battle
roars,Thick beats the combat on the sounding prores.Thou wouldst have thought,
so furious was their fire,No force could tame them, and no toil could tire;As if
new vigour from new fights they won,And the long battle was but then
begun.Greece, yet unconquer’d, kept alive the war,Secure of death, confiding in
despair:Troy in proud hopes already view’d the mainBright with the blaze, and
red with heroes slain:Like strength is felt from hope, and from despair,And each
contends, as his were all the war.’Twas thou, bold Hector! whose resistless
handFirst seized a ship on that contested strand;The same which dead Protesilaüs
bore,[242]The first that touch’d the unhappy Trojan shore:For this in arms the
warring nations stood,And bathed their generous breasts with mutual blood.No
room to poise the lance or bend the bow;But hand to hand, and man to man, they
grow:Wounded, they wound; and seek each other’s heartsWith falchions, axes,
swords, and shorten’d darts.The falchions ring, shields rattle, axes
sound,Swords flash in air, or glitter on the ground;With streaming blood the
slippery shores are dyed,And slaughter’d heroes swell the dreadful tide.Still
raging, Hector with his ample handGrasps the high stern, and gives this loud
command:[Illustration: ] AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS“Haste, bring the flames!
that toil of ten long yearsIs finished; and the day desired appears!This happy
day with acclamations greet,Bright with destruction of yon hostile fleet.The
coward-counsels of a timorous throngOf reverend dotards check’d our glory
long:Too long Jove lull’d us with lethargic charms,But now in peals of thunder
calls to arms:In this great day he crowns our full desires,Wakes all our force,
and seconds all our fires.”He spoke—the warriors at his fierce commandPour a new
deluge on the Grecian band.Even Ajax paused, (so thick the javelins fly,)Stepp’d
back, and doubted or to live or die.Yet, where the oars are placed, he stands to
waitWhat chief approaching dares attempt his fate:Even to the last his naval
charge defends,Now shakes his spear, now lifts, and now protends;Even yet, the
Greeks with piercing shouts inspires,Amidst attacks, and deaths, and darts, and
fires.“O friends! O heroes! names for ever dear,Once sons of Mars, and
thunderbolts of war!Ah! yet be mindful of your old renown,Your great
forefathers’ virtues and your own.What aids expect you in this utmost
strait?What bulwarks rising between you and fate?No aids, no bulwarks your
retreat attend,No friends to help, no city to defend.This spot is all you have,
to lose or keep;There stand the Trojans, and here rolls the deep.’Tis hostile
ground you tread; your native landsFar, far from hence: your fates are in your
hands.”Raging he spoke; nor further wastes his breath,But turns his javelin to
the work of death.Whate’er bold Trojan arm’d his daring hands,Against the sable
ships, with flaming brands,So well the chief his naval weapon sped,The luckless
warrior at his stern lay dead:Full twelve, the boldest, in a moment fell,Sent by
great Ajax to the shades of hell.[Illustration: ] CASTOR AND POLLUXBOOK
XVI.ARGUMENTTHE SIXTH BATTLE, THE ACTS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUSPatroclus (in
pursuance of the request of Nestor in the eleventh book)entreats Achilles to
suffer him to go to the assistance of the Greekswith Achilles’ troops and
armour. He agrees to it, but at the same timecharges him to content himself with
rescuing the fleet, without furtherpursuit of the enemy. The armour, horses,
soldiers, and officers aredescribed. Achilles offers a libation for the success
of his friend,after which Patroclus leads the Myrmidons to battle. The Trojans,
atthe sight of Patroclus in Achilles’ armour, taking him for that hero,are cast
into the uttermost consternation; he beats them off from thevessels, Hector
himself flies, Sarpedon is killed, though Jupiter wasaverse to his fate. Several
other particulars of the battle aredescribed; in the heat of which, Patroclus,
neglecting the orders ofAchilles, pursues the foe to the walls of Troy, where
Apollo repulsesand disarms him, Euphorbus wounds him, and Hector kills him,
whichconcludes the book.So warr’d both armies on the ensanguined shore,While the
black vessels smoked with human gore.Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies;The
streaming tears fall copious from his eyes.Not faster, trickling to the plains
below,From the tall rock the sable waters flow.Divine Pelides, with compassion
moved.Thus spoke, indulgent, to his best beloved:[243]“Patroclus, say, what
grief thy bosom bears,That flows so fast in these unmanly tears?No girl, no
infant whom the mother keepsFrom her loved breast, with fonder passion weeps;Not
more the mother’s soul, that infant warms,Clung to her knees, and reaching at
her arms,Than thou hast mine! Oh tell me, to what endThy melting sorrows thus
pursue thy friend?“Griev’st thou for me, or for my martial band?Or come sad
tidings from our native land?Our fathers live (our first, most tender care),Thy
good Menoetius breathes the vital air,And hoary Peleus yet extends his
days;Pleased in their age to hear their children’s praise.Or may some meaner
cause thy pity claim?Perhaps yon relics of the Grecian name,Doom’d in their
ships to sink by fire and sword,And pay the forfeit of their haughty
lord?Whate’er the cause, reveal thy secret care,And speak those sorrows which a
friend would share.”A sigh that instant from his bosom broke,Another follow’d,
and Patroclus spoke:“Let Greece at length with pity touch thy breast,Thyself a
Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best!Lo! every chief that might her fate
prevent,Lies pierced with wounds, and bleeding in his tent:Eurypylus, Tydides,
Atreus’ son,And wise Ulysses, at the navy groan,More for their country’s wounds
than for their own.Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease,Thy breast alone no
lenitives appease.May never rage like thine my soul enslave,O great in vain!
unprofitably brave!Thy country slighted in her last distress,What friend, what
man, from thee shall hope redress?No—men unborn, and ages yet behind,Shall curse
that fierce, that unforgiving mind.“O man unpitying! if of man thy race;But sure
thou spring’st not from a soft embrace,Nor ever amorous hero caused thy
birth,Nor ever tender goddess brought thee forth:Some rugged rock’s hard
entrails gave thee form,And raging seas produced thee in a storm,A soul well
suiting that tempestuous kind,So rough thy manners, so untamed thy mind.“If some
dire oracle thy breast alarm,If aught from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy arm,Some
beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,If I but lead the Myrmidonian line:Clad
in thy dreadful arms if I appear,Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the
war;Without thy person Greece shall win the day,And thy mere image chase her
foes away.Press’d by fresh forces, her o’erlabour’d trainShall quit the ships,
and Greece respire again.”Thus, blind to fate! with supplicating breath,Thou
begg’st his arms, and in his arms thy death.Unfortunately good! a boding sighThy
friend return’d; and with it, this reply:“Patroclus! thy Achilles knows no
fears;Nor words from Jove nor oracles he hears;Nor aught a mother’s caution can
suggest;The tyrant’s pride lies rooted in my breast.My wrongs, my wrongs, my
constant thought engage,Those, my sole oracles, inspire my rage:I made him
tyrant: gave him power to wrongEven me: I felt it; and shall feel it long.The
maid, my black-eyed maid, he forced away,Due to the toils of many a well-fought
day;Due to my conquest of her father’s reign;Due to the votes of all the Grecian
train.From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave,Disgraced, dishonour’d, like
the meanest slave.But bear we this—the wrongs I grieve are past;’Tis time our
fury should relent at last:I fix’d its date; the day I wish’d appears:How Hector
to my ships his battle bears,The flames my eyes, the shouts invade my ears.Go
then, Patroclus! court fair honour’s charmsIn Troy’s famed fields, and in
Achilles’ arms:Lead forth my martial Myrmidons to fight,Go save the fleets, and
conquer in my right.See the thin relics of their baffled bandAt the last edge of
yon deserted land!Behold all Ilion on their ships descends;How the cloud
blackens, how the storm impends!It was not thus, when, at my sight amazed,Troy
saw and trembled, as this helmet blazed:Had not the injurious king our
friendship lost,Yon ample trench had buried half her host.No camps, no bulwarks
now the Trojans fear,Those are not dreadful, no Achilles there;No longer flames
the lance of Tydeus’ son;No more your general calls his heroes on:Hector, alone,
I hear; his dreadful breathCommands your slaughter, or proclaims your death.Yet
now, Patroclus, issue to the plain:Now save the ships, the rising fires
restrain,And give the Greeks to visit Greece again.But heed my words, and mark a
friend’s command,Who trusts his fame and honours in thy hand,And from thy deeds
expects the Achaian hostShall render back the beauteous maid he lost:Rage
uncontroll’d through all the hostile crew,But touch not Hector, Hector is my
due.Though Jove in thunder should command the war,Be just, consult my glory, and
forbear.The fleet once saved, desist from further chase,Nor lead to Ilion’s
walls the Grecian race;Some adverse god thy rashness may destroy;Some god, like
Phœbus, ever kind to Troy.Let Greece, redeem’d from this destructive strait,Do
her own work; and leave the rest to fate.O! would to all the immortal powers
above,Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove!That not one Trojan might be left
alive,And not a Greek of all the race survive:Might only we the vast destruction
shun,And only we destroy the accursed town!”Such conference held the chiefs;
while on the strandGreat Jove with conquest crown’d the Trojan band.Ajax no more
the sounding storm sustain’d,So thick the darts an iron tempest rain’d:On his
tired arm the weighty buckler hung;His hollow helm with falling javelins
rung;His breath, in quick short pantings, comes and goes;And painful sweat from
all his members flows.Spent and o’erpower’d, he barely breathes at most;Yet
scarce an army stirs him from his post;Dangers on dangers all around him
glow,And toil to toil, and woe succeeds to woe.Say, Muses, throned above the
starry frame,How first the navy blazed with Trojan flame?Stern Hector waved his
sword, and standing near,Where furious Ajax plied his ashen spear,Full on the
lance a stroke so justly sped,That the broad falchion lopp’d its brazen head;His
pointless spear the warrior shakes in vain;The brazen head falls sounding on the
plain.Great Ajax saw, and own’d the hand divine;Confessing Jove, and trembling
at the sign,Warn’d he retreats. Then swift from all sides pourThe hissing
brands; thick streams the fiery shower;O’er the high stern the curling volumes
rise,And sheets of rolling smoke involve the skies.Divine Achilles view’d the
rising flames,And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims:“Arm, arm, Patroclus!
Lo, the blaze aspires!The glowing ocean reddens with the fires.Arm, ere our
vessels catch the spreading flame;Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name;I
haste to bring the troops.”—The hero said;The friend with ardour and with joy
obey’d.He cased his limbs in brass; and first aroundHis manly legs, with silver
buckles boundThe clasping greaves; then to his breast appliesThe flaming cuirass
of a thousand dyes;Emblazed with studs of gold his falchion shoneIn the rich
belt, as in a starry zone:Achilles’ shield his ample shoulders spread,Achilles’
helmet nodded o’er his head:Adorn’d in all his terrible array,He flash’d around
intolerable day.Alone untouch’d, Pelides’ javelin stands,Not to be poised but by
Pelides’ hands:From Pelion’s shady brow the plant entireOld Chiron rent, and
shaped it for his sire;Whose son’s great arm alone the weapon wields,The death
of heroes, and the dread of fields.[Illustration: ] BucklesThe brave Automedon
(an honour’d name,The second to his lord in love and fame,In peace his friend,
and partner of the war)The winged coursers harness’d to the car;Xanthus and
Balius, of immortal breed,Sprung from the wind, and like the wind in speed.Whom
the wing’d harpy, swift Podarge, bore,By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy
shore:Swift Pedasus was added to their side,(Once great Aëtion’s, now Achilles’
pride)Who, like in strength, in swiftness, and in grace,A mortal courser match’d
the immortal race.Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warmsHis hardy
Myrmidons to blood and arms.All breathing death, around the chief they stand,A
grim, terrific, formidable band:Grim as voracious wolves, that seek the
springs[244]When scalding thirst their burning bowels wrings;When some tall
stag, fresh-slaughtered in the wood,Has drench’d their wide insatiate throats
with blood,To the black fount they rush, a hideous throng,With paunch distended,
and with lolling tongue,Fire fills their eye, their black jaws belch the
gore,And gorged with slaughter still they thirst for more.Like furious, rush’d
the Myrmidonian crew,Such their dread strength, and such their deathful
view.High in the midst the great Achilles stands,Directs their order, and the
war commands.He, loved of Jove, had launch’d for Ilion’s shoresFull fifty
vessels, mann’d with fifty oars:Five chosen leaders the fierce bands
obey,Himself supreme in valour, as in sway.First march’d Menestheus, of
celestial birth,Derived from thee, whose waters wash the earth,Divine Sperchius!
Jove-descended flood!A mortal mother mixing with a god.Such was Menestheus, but
miscall’d by fameThe son of Borus, that espoused the dame.Eudorus next; whom
Polymele the gay,Famed in the graceful dance, produced to-day.Her, sly Cellenius
loved: on her would gaze,As with swift step she form’d the running maze:To her
high chamber from Diana’s quire,The god pursued her, urged, and crown’d his
fire.The son confess’d his father’s heavenly race,And heir’d his mother’s
swiftness in the chase.Strong Echecleus, bless’d in all those charmsThat pleased
a god, succeeded to her arms;Not conscious of those loves, long hid from
fame,With gifts of price he sought and won the dame;Her secret offspring to her
sire she bare;Her sire caress’d him with a parent’s care.Pisander follow’d;
matchless in his artTo wing the spear, or aim the distant dart;No hand so sure
of all the Emathian line,Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine.The fourth by
Phœnix’ grave command was graced,Laerces’ valiant offspring led the last.Soon as
Achilles with superior careHad call’d the chiefs, and order’d all the war,This
stern remembrance to his troops he gave:“Ye far-famed Myrmidons, ye fierce and
brave!Think with what threats you dared the Trojan throng,Think what reproach
these ears endured so long;‘Stern son of Peleus, (thus ye used to say,While
restless, raging, in your ships you lay)Oh nursed with gall, unknowing how to
yield;Whose rage defrauds us of so famed a field:If that dire fury must for ever
burn,What make we here? Return, ye chiefs, return!’Such were your words—Now,
warriors! grieve no more,Lo there the Trojans; bathe your swords in gore!This
day shall give you all your soul demands,Glut all your hearts, and weary all
your hands!”[Illustration: ] DIANAThus while he roused the fire in every
breast,Close and more close the listening cohorts press’d;Ranks wedged in ranks;
of arms a steely ringStill grows, and spreads, and thickens round the king.As
when a circling wall the builder forms,Of strength defensive against wind and
storms,Compacted stones the thickening work compose,And round him wide the
rising structure grows:So helm to helm, and crest to crest they throng,Shield
urged on shield, and man drove man along;Thick, undistinguish’d plumes, together
join’d,Float in one sea, and wave before the wind.Far o’er the rest in
glittering pomp appear,There bold Automedon, Patroclus here;Brothers in arms,
with equal fury fired;Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspired.But mindful
of the gods, Achilles wentTo the rich coffer in his shady tent;There lay on
heaps his various garments roll’d,And costly furs, and carpets stiff with
gold,(The presents of the silver-footed dame)From thence he took a bowl, of
antique frame,Which never man had stained with ruddy wine,Nor raised in
offerings to the power divine,But Peleus’ son; and Peleus’ son to noneHad raised
in offerings, but to Jove alone.This tinged with sulphur, sacred first to
flame,He purged; and wash’d it in the running stream.Then cleansed his hands;
and fixing for a spaceHis eyes on heaven, his feet upon the placeOf sacrifice,
the purple draught he pour’dForth in the midst; and thus the god implored:“O
thou supreme! high-throned all height above!O great Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove!Who
’midst surrounding frosts, and vapours chill,Presid’st on bleak Dodona’s vocal
hill:(Whose groves the Selli, race austere! surround,Their feet unwash’d, their
slumbers on the ground;Who hear, from rustling oaks, thy dark decrees;And catch
the fates, low-whispered in the breeze;)Hear, as of old! Thou gav’st, at Thetis’
prayer,Glory to me, and to the Greeks despair.Lo, to the dangers of the fighting
fieldThe best, the dearest of my friends, I yield,Though still determined, to my
ships confined;Patroclus gone, I stay but half behind.Oh! be his guard thy
providential care,Confirm his heart, and string his arm to war:Press’d by his
single force let Hector seeHis fame in arms not owing all to me.But when the
fleets are saved from foes and fire,Let him with conquest and renown
retire;Preserve his arms, preserve his social train,And safe return him to these
eyes again!”Great Jove consents to half the chief’s request,But heaven’s eternal
doom denies the rest;To free the fleet was granted to his prayer;His safe
return, the winds dispersed in air.Back to his tent the stern Achilles flies,And
waits the combat with impatient eyes.Meanwhile the troops beneath Patroclus’
care,Invade the Trojans, and commence the war.As wasps, provoked by children in
their play,Pour from their mansions by the broad highway,In swarms the guiltless
traveller engage,Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage:All rise
in arms, and, with a general cry,Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing
progeny.Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms,So loud their clamours,
and so keen their arms:Their rising rage Patroclus’ breath inspires,Who thus
inflames them with heroic fires:“O warriors, partners of Achilles’ praise!Be
mindful of your deeds in ancient days;Your godlike master let your acts
proclaim,And add new glories to his mighty name.Think your Achilles sees you
fight: be brave,And humble the proud monarch whom you save.”Joyful they heard,
and kindling as he spoke,Flew to the fleet, involved in fire and smoke.From
shore to shore the doubling shouts resound,The hollow ships return a deeper
sound.The war stood still, and all around them gazed,When great Achilles’
shining armour blazed:Troy saw, and thought the dread Achilles nigh,At once they
see, they tremble, and they fly.Then first thy spear, divine Patroclus!
flew,Where the war raged, and where the tumult grew.Close to the stern of that
famed ship which boreUnbless’d Protesilaus to Ilion’s shore,The great Pæonian,
bold Pyrechmes stood;(Who led his bands from Axius’ winding flood;)His
shoulder-blade receives the fatal wound;The groaning warrior pants upon the
ground.His troops, that see their country’s glory slain,Fly diverse, scatter’d
o’er the distant plain.Patroclus’ arm forbids the spreading fires,And from the
half-burn’d ship proud Troy retires;Clear’d from the smoke the joyful navy
lies;In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies;Triumphant Greece her rescued
decks ascends,And loud acclaim the starry region rends.So when thick clouds
enwrap the mountain’s head,O’er heaven’s expanse like one black ceiling
spread;Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray,Bursts through the darkness,
and lets down the day:The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise,And
streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes;The smiling scene wide opens to
the sight,And all the unmeasured ether flames with light.But Troy repulsed, and
scatter’d o’er the plains,Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains.Now
every Greek some hostile hero slew,But still the foremost, bold Patroclus
flew:As Areilycus had turn’d him round,Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing
wound;The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown,The thigh transfix’d, and
broke the brittle bone:Headlong he fell. Next, Thoas was thy chance;Thy breast,
unarm’d, received the Spartan lance.Phylides’ dart (as Amphidus drew nigh)His
blow prevented, and transpierced his thigh,Tore all the brawn, and rent the
nerves away;In darkness, and in death, the warrior lay.In equal arms two sons of
Nestor stand,And two bold brothers of the Lycian band:By great Antilochus,
Atymnius dies,Pierced in the flank, lamented youth! he lies,Kind Maris, bleeding
in his brother’s wound,Defends the breathless carcase on the ground;Furious he
flies, his murderer to engage:But godlike Thrasimed prevents his rage,Between
his arm and shoulder aims a blow;His arm falls spouting on the dust below:He
sinks, with endless darkness cover’d o’er:And vents his soul, effused with
gushing gore.Slain by two brothers, thus two brothers bleed,Sarpedon’s friends,
Amisodarus’ seed;Amisodarus, who, by Furies led,The bane of men, abhorr’d
Chimaera bred;Skill’d in the dart in vain, his sons expire,And pay the forfeit
of their guilty sire.Stopp’d in the tumult Cleobulus lies,Beneath Oïleus’ arm, a
living prize;A living prize not long the Trojan stood;The thirsty falchion drank
his reeking blood:Plunged in his throat the smoking weapon lies;Black death, and
fate unpitying, seal his eyes.Amid the ranks, with mutual thirst of fame,Lycon
the brave, and fierce Peneleus came;In vain their javelins at each other
flew,Now, met in arms, their eager swords they drew.On the plumed crest of his
Bœotian foeThe daring Lycon aim’d a noble blow;The sword broke short; but his,
Peneleus spedFull on the juncture of the neck and head:The head, divided by a
stroke so just,Hung by the skin; the body sunk to dust.O’ertaken Neamas by
Merion bleeds,Pierced through the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;Back from the
car he tumbles to the ground:His swimming eyes eternal shades surround.Next
Erymas was doom’d his fate to feel,His open’d mouth received the Cretan
steel:Beneath the brain the point a passage tore,Crash’d the thin bones, and
drown’d the teeth in gore:His mouth, his eyes, his nostrils, pour a flood;He
sobs his soul out in the gush of blood.As when the flocks neglected by the
swain,Or kids, or lambs, lie scatter’d o’er the plain,A troop of wolves the
unguarded charge survey,And rend the trembling, unresisting prey:Thus on the foe
the Greeks impetuous came;Troy fled, unmindful of her former fame.But still at
Hector godlike Ajax aim’d,Still, pointed at his breast, his javelin flamed.The
Trojan chief, experienced in the field,O’er his broad shoulders spread the massy
shield,Observed the storm of darts the Grecians pour,And on his buckler caught
the ringing shower:He sees for Greece the scale of conquest rise,Yet stops, and
turns, and saves his loved allies.As when the hand of Jove a tempest forms,And
rolls the cloud to blacken heaven with storms,Dark o’er the fields the ascending
vapour flies,And shades the sun, and blots the golden skies:So from the ships,
along the dusky plain,Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan train.Even Hector
fled; through heads of disarrayThe fiery coursers forced their lord away:While
far behind his Trojans fall confused;Wedged in the trench, in one vast carnage
bruised:Chariots on chariots roll: the clashing spokesShock; while the madding
steeds break short their yokes.In vain they labour up the steepy mound;Their
charioteers lie foaming on the ground.Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus
flies;Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies;Thick drifts of dust involve
their rapid flight;Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatch’d from sight.The
affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down,Scour o’er the fields, and stretch
to reach the town.Loud o’er the rout was heard the victor’s cry,Where the war
bleeds, and where the thickest die,Where horse and arms, and chariots lie
o’erthrown,And bleeding heroes under axles groan.No stop, no check, the steeds
of Peleus knew:From bank to bank the immortal coursers flew.High-bounding o’er
the fosse, the whirling carSmokes through the ranks, o’ertakes the flying
war,And thunders after Hector; Hector flies,Patroclus shakes his lance; but fate
denies.Not with less noise, with less impetuous force,The tide of Trojans urge
their desperate course,Than when in autumn Jove his fury pours,And earth is
loaden with incessant showers;(When guilty mortals break the eternal laws,Or
judges, bribed, betray the righteous cause;)From their deep beds he bids the
rivers rise,And opens all the flood-gates of the skies:The impetuous torrents
from their hills obey,Whole fields are drown’d, and mountains swept away;Loud
roars the deluge till it meets the main;And trembling man sees all his labours
vain!And now the chief (the foremost troops repell’d)Back to the ships his
destined progress held,Bore down half Troy in his resistless way,And forced the
routed ranks to stand the day.Between the space where silver Simois flows,Where
lay the fleets, and where the rampires rose,All grim in dust and blood Patroclus
stands,And turns the slaughter on the conquering bands.First Pronous died
beneath his fiery dart,Which pierced below the shield his valiant heart.Thestor
was next, who saw the chief appear,And fell the victim of his coward fear;Shrunk
up he sat, with wild and haggard eye,Nor stood to combat, nor had force to
fly;Patroclus mark’d him as he shunn’d the war,And with unmanly tremblings shook
the car,And dropp’d the flowing reins. Him ’twixt the jaws,The javelin sticks,
and from the chariot draws.As on a rock that overhangs the main,An angler,
studious of the line and cane,Some mighty fish draws panting to the shore:Not
with less ease the barbed javelin boreThe gaping dastard; as the spear was
shook,He fell, and life his heartless breast forsook.Next on Eryalus he flies; a
stone,Large as a rock, was by his fury thrown:Full on his crown the ponderous
fragment flew,And burst the helm, and cleft the head in two:Prone to the ground
the breathless warrior fell,And death involved him with the shades of hell.Then
low in dust Epaltes, Echius, lie;Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die;Amphoterus and
Erymas succeed;And last Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed.Where’er he moves, the
growing slaughters spreadIn heaps on heaps a monument of dead.When now Sarpedon
his brave friends beheldGrovelling in dust, and gasping on the field,With this
reproach his flying host he warms:“Oh stain to honour! oh disgrace to
arms!Forsake, inglorious, the contended plain;This hand unaided shall the war
sustain:The task be mine this hero’s strength to try,Who mows whole troops, and
makes an army fly.”He spake: and, speaking, leaps from off the car:Patroclus
lights, and sternly waits the war.As when two vultures on the mountain’s
heightStoop with resounding pinions to the fight;They cuff, they tear, they
raise a screaming cry;The desert echoes, and the rocks reply:The warriors thus
opposed in arms, engageWith equal clamours, and with equal rage.Jove view’d the
combat: whose event foreseen,He thus bespoke his sister and his queen:“The hour
draws on; the destinies ordain,[245]My godlike son shall press the Phrygian
plain:Already on the verge of death he stands,His life is owed to fierce
Patroclus’ hands,What passions in a parent’s breast debate!Say, shall I snatch
him from impending fate,And send him safe to Lycia, distant farFrom all the
dangers and the toils of war;Or to his doom my bravest offspring yield,And
fatten, with celestial blood, the field?”Then thus the goddess with the radiant
eyes:“What words are these, O sovereign of the skies!Short is the date
prescribed to mortal man;Shall Jove for one extend the narrow span,Whose bounds
were fix’d before his race began?How many sons of gods, foredoom’d to
death,Before proud Ilion must resign their breath!Were thine exempt, debate
would rise above,And murmuring powers condemn their partial Jove.Give the bold
chief a glorious fate in fight;And when the ascending soul has wing’d her
flight,Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy command,The breathless body to his
native land.His friends and people, to his future praise,A marble tomb and
pyramid shall raise,And lasting honours to his ashes give;His fame (’tis all the
dead can have) shall live.”She said: the cloud-compeller, overcome,Assents to
fate, and ratifies the doom.Then touch’d with grief, the weeping heavens
distill’dA shower of blood o’er all the fatal field:The god, his eyes averting
from the plain,Laments his son, predestined to be slain,Far from the Lycian
shores, his happy native reign.Now met in arms, the combatants appear;Each
heaved the shield, and poised the lifted spear;From strong Patroclus’ hand the
javelin fled,And pass’d the groin of valiant Thrasymed;The nerves unbraced no
more his bulk sustain,He falls, and falling bites the bloody plain.Two sounding
darts the Lycian leader threw:The first aloof with erring fury flew,The next
transpierced Achilles’ mortal steed,The generous Pedasus of Theban breed:Fix’d
in the shoulder’s joint, he reel’d around,Roll’d in the bloody dust, and paw’d
the slippery ground.His sudden fall the entangled harness broke;Each axle
crackled, and the chariot shook:When bold Automedon, to disengageThe starting
coursers, and restrain their rage,Divides the traces with his sword, and
freedThe encumbered chariot from the dying steed:The rest move on, obedient to
the rein:The car rolls slowly o’er the dusty plain.The towering chiefs to
fiercer fight advance:And first Sarpedon whirl’d his weighty lance,Which o’er
the warrior’s shoulder took its course,And spent in empty air its dying
force.Not so Patroclus’ never-erring dart;Aim’d at his breast it pierced a
mortal part,Where the strong fibres bind the solid heart.Then as the mountain
oak, or poplar tall,Or pine (fit mast for some great admiral)Nods to the axe,
till with a groaning soundIt sinks, and spreads its honours on the ground,Thus
fell the king; and laid on earth supine,Before his chariot stretch’d his form
divine:He grasp’d the dust distain’d with streaming gore,And, pale in death, lay
groaning on the shore.So lies a bull beneath the lion’s paws,While the grim
savage grinds with foamy jawsThe trembling limbs, and sucks the smoking
blood;Deep groans, and hollow roars, rebellow through the wood.Then to the
leader of the Lycian bandThe dying chief address’d his last command;“Glaucus, be
bold; thy task be first to dareThe glorious dangers of destructive war,To lead
my troops, to combat at their head,Incite the living, and supply the dead.Tell
them, I charged them with my latest breathNot unrevenged to bear Sarpedon’s
death.What grief, what shame, must Glaucus undergo,If these spoil’d arms adorn a
Grecian foe!Then as a friend, and as a warrior fight;Defend my body, conquer in
my right:That, taught by great examples, all may tryLike thee to vanquish, or
like me to die.”He ceased; the Fates suppress’d his labouring breath,And his
eyes darken’d with the shades of death.The insulting victor with disdain
bestrodeThe prostrate prince, and on his bosom trod;Then drew the weapon from
his panting heart,The reeking fibres clinging to the dart;From the wide wound
gush’d out a stream of blood,And the soul issued in the purple flood.His flying
steeds the Myrmidons detain,Unguided now, their mighty master slain.All-impotent
of aid, transfix’d with grief,Unhappy Glaucus heard the dying chief:His painful
arm, yet useless with the smartInflicted late by Teucer’s deadly dart,Supported
on his better hand he stay’d:To Phœbus then (’twas all he could) he
pray’d:“All-seeing monarch! whether Lycia’s coast,Or sacred Ilion, thy bright
presence boast,Powerful alike to ease the wretch’s smart;O hear me! god of every
healing art!Lo! stiff with clotted blood, and pierced with pain,That thrills my
arm, and shoots through every vein,I stand unable to sustain the spear,And sigh,
at distance from the glorious war.Low in the dust is great Sarpedon laid,Nor
Jove vouchsafed his hapless offspring aid;But thou, O god of health! thy succour
lend,To guard the relics of my slaughter’d friend:For thou, though distant,
canst restore my might,To head my Lycians, and support the fight.”Apollo heard;
and, suppliant as he stood,His heavenly hand restrain’d the flux of blood;He
drew the dolours from the wounded part,And breathed a spirit in his rising
heart.Renew’d by art divine, the hero stands,And owns the assistance of immortal
hands.First to the fight his native troops he warms,Then loudly calls on Troy’s
vindictive arms;With ample strides he stalks from place to place;Now fires
Agenor, now Polydamas:Æneas next, and Hector he accosts;Inflaming thus the rage
of all their hosts.“What thoughts, regardless chief! thy breast employ?Oh too
forgetful of the friends of Troy!Those generous friends, who, from their country
far,Breathe their brave souls out in another’s war.See! where in dust the great
Sarpedon lies,In action valiant, and in council wise,Who guarded right, and kept
his people free;To all his Lycians lost, and lost to thee!Stretch’d by
Patroclus’ arm on yonder plains,O save from hostile rage his loved remains!Ah
let not Greece his conquer’d trophies boast,Nor on his corse revenge her heroes
lost!”He spoke: each leader in his grief partook:Troy, at the loss, through all
her legions shook.Transfix’d with deep regret, they view o’erthrownAt once his
country’s pillar, and their own;A chief, who led to Troy’s beleaguer’d wallA
host of heroes, and outshined them all.Fired, they rush on; first Hector seeks
the foes,And with superior vengeance greatly glows.But o’er the dead the fierce
Patroclus stands,And rousing Ajax, roused the listening bands:“Heroes, be men;
be what you were before;Or weigh the great occasion, and be more.The chief who
taught our lofty walls to yield,Lies pale in death, extended on the field.To
guard his body Troy in numbers flies;’Tis half the glory to maintain our
prize.Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread,And send the living
Lycians to the dead.”The heroes kindle at his fierce command;The martial
squadrons close on either hand:Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud
alarms,Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms.With horrid shouts they
circle round the slain;The clash of armour rings o’er all the plain.Great Jove,
to swell the horrors of the fight,O’er the fierce armies pours pernicious
night,And round his son confounds the warring hosts,His fate ennobling with a
crowd of ghosts.Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls;Agacleus’ son,
from Budium’s lofty walls;Who chased for murder thence a suppliant cameTo
Peleus, and the silver-footed dame;Now sent to Troy, Achilles’ arms to aid,He
pays due vengeance to his kinsman’s shade.Soon as his luckless hand had touch’d
the dead,A rock’s large fragment thunder’d on his head;Hurl’d by Hectorean force
it cleft in twainHis shatter’d helm, and stretch’d him o’er the slain.Fierce to
the van of fight Patroclus came,And, like an eagle darting at his game,Sprung on
the Trojan and the Lycian band.What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand,O
generous Greek! when with full vigour thrown,At Sthenelaus flew the weighty
stone,Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too nearThat arm, drew back; and
Hector learn’d to fear.Far as an able hand a lance can throw,Or at the lists, or
at the fighting foe;So far the Trojans from their lines retired;Till Glaucus,
turning, all the rest inspired.Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his rage,The only
hope of Chalcon’s trembling age;Wide o’er the land was stretch’d his large
domain,With stately seats, and riches blest in vain:Him, bold with youth, and
eager to pursueThe flying Lycians, Glaucus met and slew;Pierced through the
bosom with a sudden wound,He fell, and falling made the fields resound.The
Achaians sorrow for their heroes slain;With conquering shouts the Trojans shake
the plain,And crowd to spoil the dead: the Greeks oppose;An iron circle round
the carcase grows.Then brave Laogonus resign’d his breath,Despatch’d by Merion
to the shades of death:On Ida’s holy hill he made abode,The priest of Jove, and
honour’d like his god.Between the jaw and ear the javelin went;The soul,
exhaling, issued at the vent.His spear Æneas at the victor threw,Who stooping
forward from the death withdrew;The lance hiss’d harmless o’er his covering
shield,And trembling struck, and rooted in the field;There yet scarce spent, it
quivers on the plain,Sent by the great Æneas’ arm in vain.“Swift as thou art
(the raging hero cries)And skill’d in dancing to dispute the prize,My spear, the
destined passage had it found,Had fix’d thy active vigour to the ground.”“O
valiant leader of the Dardan host!(Insulted Merion thus retorts the boast)Strong
as you are, ’tis mortal force you trust,An arm as strong may stretch thee in the
dust.And if to this my lance thy fate be given,Vain are thy vaunts; success is
still from heaven:This, instant, sends thee down to Pluto’s coast;Mine is the
glory, his thy parting ghost.”“O friend (Menoetius’ son this answer gave)With
words to combat, ill befits the brave;Not empty boasts the sons of Troy
repel,Your swords must plunge them to the shades of hell.To speak, beseems the
council; but to dareIn glorious action, is the task of war.”This said, Patroclus
to the battle flies;Great Merion follows, and new shouts arise:Shields, helmets
rattle, as the warriors close;And thick and heavy sounds the storm of blows.As
through the shrilling vale, or mountain ground,The labours of the woodman’s axe
resound;Blows following blows are heard re-echoing wide,While crackling forests
fall on every side:Thus echoed all the fields with loud alarms,So fell the
warriors, and so rung their arms.Now great Sarpedon on the sandy shore,His
heavenly form defaced with dust and gore,And stuck with darts by warring heroes
shed,Lies undistinguish’d from the vulgar dead.His long-disputed corse the
chiefs enclose,On every side the busy combat grows;Thick as beneath some
shepherd’s thatch’d abode(The pails high foaming with a milky flood)The buzzing
flies, a persevering train,Incessant swarm, and chased return again.Jove view’d
the combat with a stern survey,And eyes that flash’d intolerable day.Fix’d on
the field his sight, his breast debatesThe vengeance due, and meditates the
fates:Whether to urge their prompt effect, and callThe force of Hector to
Patroclus’ fall,This instant see his short-lived trophies won,And stretch him
breathless on his slaughter’d son;Or yet, with many a soul’s untimely
flight,Augment the fame and horror of the fight.To crown Achilles’ valiant
friend with praiseAt length he dooms; and, that his last of daysShall set in
glory, bids him drive the foe;Nor unattended see the shades below.Then Hector’s
mind he fills with dire dismay;He mounts his car, and calls his hosts away;Sunk
with Troy’s heavy fates, he sees declineThe scales of Jove, and pants with awe
divine.Then, nor before, the hardy Lycians fled,And left their monarch with the
common dead:Around, in heaps on heaps, a dreadful wallOf carnage rises, as the
heroes fall.(So Jove decreed!) At length the Greeks obtainThe prize contested,
and despoil the slain.The radiant arms are by Patroclus borne;Patroclus’ ships
the glorious spoils adorn.Then thus to Phœbus, in the realms above,Spoke from
his throne the cloud-compelling Jove:“Descend, my Phœbus! on the Phrygian
plain,And from the fight convey Sarpedon slain;Then bathe his body in the
crystal flood,With dust dishonour’d, and deform’d with blood;O’er all his limbs
ambrosial odours shed,And with celestial robes adorn the dead.Those rites
discharged, his sacred corse bequeathTo the soft arms of silent Sleep and
Death.They to his friends the immortal charge shall bear;His friends a tomb and
pyramid shall rear:What honour mortals after death receive,Those unavailing
honours we may give!”[Illustration: ] SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF
SARPEDON TOLYCIAApollo bows, and from mount Ida’s height,Swift to the field
precipitates his flight;Thence from the war the breathless hero bore,Veil’d in a
cloud, to silver Simois’ shore;There bathed his honourable wounds, and
dress’dHis manly members in the immortal vest;And with perfumes of sweet
ambrosial dewsRestores his freshness, and his form renews.Then Sleep and Death,
two twins of winged race,Of matchless swiftness, but of silent pace,Received
Sarpedon, at the god’s command,And in a moment reach’d the Lycian land;The corse
amidst his weeping friends they laid,Where endless honours wait the sacred
shade.Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains,With foaming coursers, and with
loosen’d reins.Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew,Ah blind to fate! thy
headlong fury flew:Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain,Vain was thy
friend’s command, thy courage vain.For he, the god, whose counsels
uncontroll’dDismay the mighty, and confound the bold;The god who gives, resumes,
and orders all,He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall.Who first, brave
hero! by that arm was slain,Who last beneath thy vengeance press’d the
plain;When heaven itself thy fatal fury led,And call’d to fill the number of the
dead?Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds;Echeclus follows; next young Megas
bleeds,Epistor, Melanippus, bite the ground;The slaughter, Elasus and Mulius
crown’d:Then sunk Pylartes to eternal night;The rest, dispersing, trust their
fates to flight.Now Troy had stoop’d beneath his matchless power,But flaming
Phœbus kept the sacred tower.Thrice at the battlements Patroclus strook;[246]His
blazing ægis thrice Apollo shook;He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the
cloud,A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.“Patroclus! cease; this
heaven-defended wallDefies thy lance; not fated yet to fall;Thy friend, thy
greater far, it shall withstand,Troy shall not stoop even to Achilles’ hand.”So
spoke the god who darts celestial fires;The Greek obeys him, and with awe
retires.While Hector, checking at the Scæan gatesHis panting coursers, in his
breast debates,Or in the field his forces to employ,Or draw the troops within
the walls of Troy.Thus while he thought, beside him Phœbus stood,In Asius’
shape, who reigned by Sangar’s flood;(Thy brother, Hecuba! from Dymas sprung,A
valiant warrior, haughty, bold, and young;)Thus he accosts him. “What a shameful
sight!God! is it Hector that forbears the fight?Were thine my vigour this
successful spearShould soon convince thee of so false a fear.Turn thee, ah turn
thee to the field of fame,And in Patroclus’ blood efface thy shame.Perhaps
Apollo shall thy arms succeed,And heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed.”So
spoke the inspiring god; then took his flight,And plunged amidst the tumult of
the fight.He bids Cebrion drive the rapid car;The lash resounds, the coursers
rush to war.The god the Grecians’ sinking souls depress’d,And pour’d swift
spirits through each Trojan breast.Patroclus lights, impatient for the fight;A
spear his left, a stone employs his right:With all his nerves he drives it at
the foe.Pointed above, and rough and gross below:The falling ruin crush’d
Cebrion’s head,The lawless offspring of king Priam’s bed;His front, brows, eyes,
one undistinguish’d wound:The bursting balls drop sightless to the ground.The
charioteer, while yet he held the rein,Struck from the car, falls headlong on
the plain.To the dark shades the soul unwilling glides,While the proud victor
thus his fall derides.“Good heaven! what active feats yon artist shows!What
skilful divers are our Phrygian foes!Mark with what ease they sink into the
sand!Pity that all their practice is by land!”Then rushing sudden on his
prostrate prize,To spoil the carcase fierce Patroclus flies:Swift as a lion,
terrible and bold,That sweeps the field, depopulates the fold;Pierced through
the dauntless heart, then tumbles slain,And from his fatal courage finds his
bane.At once bold Hector leaping from his car,Defends the body, and provokes the
war.Thus for some slaughter’d hind, with equal rage,Two lordly rulers of the
wood engage;Stung with fierce hunger, each the prey invades,And echoing roars
rebellow through the shades.Stern Hector fastens on the warrior’s head,And by
the foot Patroclus drags the dead:While all around, confusion, rage, and
fright,Mix the contending hosts in mortal fight.So pent by hills, the wild winds
roar aloudIn the deep bosom of some gloomy wood;Leaves, arms, and trees, aloft
in air are blown,The broad oaks crackle, and the Sylvans groan;This way and
that, the rattling thicket bends,And the whole forest in one crash descends.Not
with less noise, with less tumultuous rage,In dreadful shock the mingled hosts
engage.Darts shower’d on darts, now round the carcase ring;Now flights of arrows
bounding from the string:Stones follow stones; some clatter on the fields,Some
hard, and heavy, shake the sounding shields.But where the rising whirlwind
clouds the plains,Sunk in soft dust the mighty chief remains,And, stretch’d in
death, forgets the guiding reins!Now flaming from the zenith, Sol had drivenHis
fervid orb through half the vault of heaven;While on each host with equal
tempests fellThe showering darts, and numbers sank to hell.But when his evening
wheels o’erhung the main,Glad conquest rested on the Grecian train.Then from
amidst the tumult and alarms,They draw the conquer’d corse and radiant arms.Then
rash Patroclus with new fury glows,And breathing slaughter, pours amid the
foes.Thrice on the press like Mars himself he flew,And thrice three heroes at
each onset slew.There ends thy glory! there the Fates untwineThe last, black
remnant of so bright a line:Apollo dreadful stops thy middle way;Death calls,
and heaven allows no longer day!For lo! the god in dusky clouds
enshrined,Approaching dealt a staggering blow behind.The weighty shock his neck
and shoulders feel;His eyes flash sparkles, his stunn’d senses reelIn giddy
darkness; far to distance flung,His bounding helmet on the champaign
rung.Achilles’ plume is stain’d with dust and gore;That plume which never
stoop’d to earth before;Long used, untouch’d, in fighting fields to shine,And
shade the temples of the mad divine.Jove dooms it now on Hector’s helm to
nod;Not long—for fate pursues him, and the god.His spear in shivers falls; his
ample shieldDrops from his arm: his baldric strows the field:The corslet his
astonish’d breast forsakes:Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror
shakes;Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands:Such is the force of more
than mortal hands!A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame,From Panthus
sprung, Euphorbus was his name;Famed for the manage of the foaming horse,Skill’d
in the dart, and matchless in the course:Full twenty knights he tumbled from the
car,While yet he learn’d his rudiments of war.His venturous spear first drew the
hero’s gore;He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more.Nor, though disarm’d,
Patroclus’ fury stood:But swift withdrew the long-protended wood.And turn’d him
short, and herded in the crowd.Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear,Wounded,
at once, Patroclus yields to fear,Retires for succour to his social train,And
flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain.Stern Hector, as the bleeding
chief he views,Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues:The lance
arrests him with a mortal wound;He falls, earth thunders, and his arms
resound.With him all Greece was sunk; that moment allHer yet-surviving heroes
seem’d to fall.So, scorch’d with heat, along the desert score,The roaming lion
meets a bristly boar,Fast by the spring; they both dispute the flood,With
flaming eyes, and jaws besmear’d with blood;At length the sovereign savage wins
the strife;And the torn boar resigns his thirst and life.Patroclus thus, so many
chiefs o’erthrown,So many lives effused, expires his own.As dying now at
Hector’s feet he lies,He sternly views him, and triumphant cries:“Lie there,
Patroclus! and with thee, the joyThy pride once promised, of subverting Troy;The
fancied scenes of Ilion wrapt in flames,And thy soft pleasures served with
captive dames.Unthinking man! I fought those towers to free,And guard that
beauteous race from lords like thee:But thou a prey to vultures shalt be
made;Thy own Achilles cannot lend thee aid;Though much at parting that great
chief might say,And much enjoin thee, this important day.‘Return not, my brave
friend (perhaps he said),Without the bloody arms of Hector dead.’He spoke,
Patroclus march’d, and thus he sped.”Supine, and wildly gazing on the skies,With
faint, expiring breath, the chief replies:“Vain boaster! cease, and know the
powers divine!Jove’s and Apollo’s is this deed, not thine;To heaven is owed
whate’er your own you call,And heaven itself disarm’d me ere my fall.Had twenty
mortals, each thy match in might,Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in fight:By
fate and Phœbus was I first o’erthrown,Euphorbus next; the third mean part thy
own.But thou, imperious! hear my latest breath;The gods inspire it, and it
sounds thy death:Insulting man, thou shalt be soon as I;Black fate o’erhangs
thee, and thy hour draws nigh;Even now on life’s last verge I see thee stand,I
see thee fall, and by Achilles’ hand.”He faints: the soul unwilling wings her
way,(The beauteous body left a load of clay)Flits to the lone, uncomfortable
coast;A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!Then Hector pausing, as his eyes he
fedOn the pale carcase, thus address’d the dead:“From whence this boding speech,
the stern decreeOf death denounced, or why denounced to me?Why not as well
Achilles’ fate be givenTo Hector’s lance? Who knows the will of heaven?”Pensive
he said; then pressing as he layHis breathless bosom, tore the lance away;And
upwards cast the corse: the reeking spearHe shakes, and charges the bold
charioteer.But swift Automedon with loosen’d reinsRapt in the chariot o’er the
distant plains,Far from his rage the immortal coursers drove;The immortal
coursers were the gift of Jove.[Illustration: ] ÆSCULAPIUSBOOK XVII.ARGUMENT.THE
SEVENTH BATTLE, FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.—THE ACTS OF MENELAUS.Menelaus, upon
the death of Patroclus, defends his body from the enemy:Euphorbus, who attempts
it, is slain. Hector advancing, Menelausretires; but soon returns with Ajax, and
drives him off. This, Glaucusobjects to Hector as a flight, who thereupon puts
on the armour he hadwon from Patroclus, and renews the battle. The Greeks give
way, tillAjax rallies them: Æneas sustains the Trojans. Æneas and Hector
attemptthe chariot of Achilles, which is borne off by Automedon. The horses
ofAchilles deplore the loss of Patroclus: Jupiter covers his body with athick
darkness: the noble prayer of Ajax on that occasion. Menelaussends Antilochus to
Achilles, with the news of Patroclus’ death: thenreturns to the fight, where,
though attacked with the utmost fury, heand Meriones, assisted by the Ajaces,
bear off the body to the ships. The time is the evening of the
eight-and-twentieth day. The scene lies in the fields before Troy.On the cold
earth divine Patroclus spread,Lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar
dead.Great Menelaus, touch’d with generous woe,Springs to the front, and guards
him from the foe.Thus round her new-fallen young the heifer moves,Fruit of her
throes, and first-born of her loves;And anxious (helpless as he lies, and
bare)Turns, and re-turns her, with a mother’s care,Opposed to each that near the
carcase came,His broad shield glimmers, and his lances flame.The son of Panthus,
skill’d the dart to send,Eyes the dead hero, and insults the friend.“This hand,
Atrides, laid Patroclus low;Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal blow:To me the
spoils my prowess won, resign:Depart with life, and leave the glory mine.”The
Trojan thus: the Spartan monarch burn’dWith generous anguish, and in scorn
return’d:“Laugh’st thou not, Jove! from thy superior throne,When mortals boast
of prowess not their own?Not thus the lion glories in his might,Nor panther
braves his spotted foe in fight,Nor thus the boar (those terrors of the
plain;)Man only vaunts his force, and vaunts in vain.But far the vainest of the
boastful kind,These sons of Panthus vent their haughty mind.Yet ’twas but late,
beneath my conquering steelThis boaster’s brother, Hyperenor, fell;Against our
arm which rashly he defied,Vain was his vigour, and as vain his pride.These eyes
beheld him on the dust expire,No more to cheer his spouse, or glad his
sire.Presumptuous youth! like his shall be thy doom,Go, wait thy brother to the
Stygian gloom;Or, while thou may’st, avoid the threaten’d fate;Fools stay to
feel it, and are wise too late.”Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: “That action
known,Come, for my brother’s blood repay thy own.His weeping father claims thy
destined head,And spouse, a widow in her bridal bed.On these thy conquer’d
spoils I shall bestow,To soothe a consort’s and a parent’s woe.No longer then
defer the glorious strife,Let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life.”Swift
as the word the missile lance he flings;The well-aim’d weapon on the buckler
rings,But blunted by the brass, innoxious falls.On Jove the father great Atrides
calls,Nor flies the javelin from his arm in vain,It pierced his throat, and bent
him to the plain;Wide through the neck appears the grisly wound,Prone sinks the
warrior, and his arms resound.The shining circlets of his golden hair,Which even
the Graces might be proud to wear,Instarr’d with gems and gold, bestrow the
shore,With dust dishonour’d, and deform’d with gore.As the young olive, in some
sylvan scene,Crown’d by fresh fountains with eternal green,Lifts the gay head,
in snowy flowerets fair,And plays and dances to the gentle air;When lo! a
whirlwind from high heaven invadesThe tender plant, and withers all its
shades;It lies uprooted from its genial bed,A lovely ruin now defaced and
dead:Thus young, thus beautiful, Euphorbus lay,While the fierce Spartan tore his
arms away.Proud of his deed, and glorious in the prize,Affrighted Troy the
towering victor flies:Flies, as before some mountain lion’s ireThe village curs
and trembling swains retire,When o’er the slaughter’d bull they hear him
roar,And see his jaws distil with smoking gore:All pale with fear, at distance
scatter’d round,They shout incessant, and the vales resound.Meanwhile Apollo
view’d with envious eyes,And urged great Hector to dispute the prize;(In Mentes’
shape, beneath whose martial careThe rough Ciconians learn’d the trade of
war;)[247]“Forbear (he cried) with fruitless speed to chaseAchilles’ coursers,
of ethereal race;They stoop not, these, to mortal man’s command,Or stoop to none
but great Achilles’ hand.Too long amused with a pursuit so vain,Turn, and behold
the brave Euphorbus slain;By Sparta slain! for ever now suppress’dThe fire which
burn’d in that undaunted breast!”Thus having spoke, Apollo wing’d his flight,And
mix’d with mortals in the toils of fight:His words infix’d unutterable careDeep
in great Hector’s soul: through all the warHe darts his anxious eye; and,
instant, view’dThe breathless hero in his blood imbued,(Forth welling from the
wound, as prone he lay)And in the victor’s hands the shining prey.Sheath’d in
bright arms, through cleaving ranks he flies,And sends his voice in thunder to
the skies:Fierce as a flood of flame by Vulcan sent,It flew, and fired the
nations as it went.Atrides from the voice the storm divined,And thus explored
his own unconquer’d mind:“Then shall I quit Patroclus on the plain,Slain in my
cause, and for my honour slain!Desert the arms, the relics, of my friend?Or
singly, Hector and his troops attend?Sure where such partial favour heaven
bestow’d,To brave the hero were to brave the god:Forgive me, Greece, if once I
quit the field;’Tis not to Hector, but to heaven I yield.Yet, nor the god, nor
heaven, should give me fear,Did but the voice of Ajax reach my ear:Still would
we turn, still battle on the plains,And give Achilles all that yet remainsOf his
and our Patroclus—” This, no moreThe time allow’d: Troy thicken’d on the shore.A
sable scene! The terrors Hector led.Slow he recedes, and sighing quits the
dead.So from the fold the unwilling lion parts,Forced by loud clamours, and a
storm of darts;He flies indeed, but threatens as he flies,With heart indignant
and retorted eyes.Now enter’d in the Spartan ranks, he turn’dHis manly breast,
and with new fury burn’d;O’er all the black battalions sent his view,And through
the cloud the godlike Ajax knew;Where labouring on the left the warrior
stood,All grim in arms, and cover’d o’er with blood;There breathing courage,
where the god of dayHad sunk each heart with terror and dismay.To him the king:
“Oh Ajax, oh my friend!Haste, and Patroclus’ loved remains defend:The body to
Achilles to restoreDemands our care; alas, we can no more!For naked now,
despoiled of arms, he lies;And Hector glories in the dazzling prize.”He said,
and touch’d his heart. The raging pairPierced the thick battle, and provoke the
war.Already had stern Hector seized his head,And doom’d to Trojan gods the
unhappy dead;But soon as Ajax rear’d his tower-like shield,Sprung to his car,
and measured back the field,His train to Troy the radiant armour bear,To stand a
trophy of his fame in war.Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad shield
display’d)Guards the dead hero with the dreadful shade;And now before, and now
behind he stood:Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood,With many a step, the
lioness surroundsHer tawny young, beset by men and hounds;Elate her heart, and
rousing all her powers,Dark o’er the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lours.Fast
by his side the generous Spartan glowsWith great revenge, and feeds his inward
woes.But Glaucus, leader of the Lycian aids,On Hector frowning, thus his flight
upbraids:“Where now in Hector shall we Hector find?A manly form, without a manly
mind.Is this, O chief! a hero’s boasted fame?How vain, without the merit, is the
name!Since battle is renounced, thy thoughts employWhat other methods may
preserve thy Troy:’Tis time to try if Ilion’s state can standBy thee alone, nor
ask a foreign hand:Mean, empty boast! but shall the Lycians stakeTheir lives for
you? those Lycians you forsake?What from thy thankless arms can we expect?Thy
friend Sarpedon proves thy base neglect;Say, shall our slaughter’d bodies guard
your walls,While unreveng’d the great Sarpedon falls?Even where he died for
Troy, you left him there,A feast for dogs, and all the fowls of air.On my
command if any Lycian wait,Hence let him march, and give up Troy to fate.Did
such a spirit as the gods impartImpel one Trojan hand or Trojan heart,(Such as
should burn in every soul that drawsThe sword for glory, and his country’s
cause)Even yet our mutual arms we might employ,And drag yon carcase to the walls
of Troy.Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtainSarpedon’s arms and honour’d
corse again!Greece with Achilles’ friend should be repaid,And thus due honours
purchased to his shade.But words are vain—Let Ajax once appear,And Hector
trembles and recedes with fear;Thou dar’st not meet the terrors of his eye;And
lo! already thou prepar’st to fly.”The Trojan chief with fix’d resentment
eyedThe Lycian leader, and sedate replied:“Say, is it just, my friend, that
Hector’s earFrom such a warrior such a speech should hear?I deem’d thee once the
wisest of thy kind,But ill this insult suits a prudent mind.I shun great Ajax? I
desert my train?’Tis mine to prove the rash assertion vain;I joy to mingle where
the battle bleeds,And hear the thunder of the sounding steeds.But Jove’s high
will is ever uncontroll’d,The strong he withers, and confounds the bold;Now
crowns with fame the mighty man, and nowStrikes the fresh garland from the
victor’s brow!Come, through yon squadrons let us hew the way,And thou be
witness, if I fear to-day;If yet a Greek the sight of Hector dread,Or yet their
hero dare defend the dead.”Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries:“Ye
Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and allies!Be men, my friends, in action as in
name,And yet be mindful of your ancient fame.Hector in proud Achilles’ arms
shall shine,Torn from his friend, by right of conquest mine.”He strode along the
field, as thus he said:(The sable plumage nodded o’er his head:)Swift through
the spacious plain he sent a look;One instant saw, one instant overtookThe
distant band, that on the sandy shoreThe radiant spoils to sacred Ilion
bore.There his own mail unbraced the field bestrow’d;His train to Troy convey’d
the massy load.Now blazing in the immortal arms he stands;The work and present
of celestial hands;By aged Peleus to Achilles given,As first to Peleus by the
court of heaven:His father’s arms not long Achilles wears,Forbid by fate to
reach his father’s years.Him, proud in triumph, glittering from afar,The god
whose thunder rends the troubled airBeheld with pity; as apart he sat,And,
conscious, look’d through all the scene of fate.He shook the sacred honours of
his head;Olympus trembled, and the godhead said;“Ah, wretched man! unmindful of
thy end!A moment’s glory; and what fates attend!In heavenly panoply divinely
brightThou stand’st, and armies tremble at thy sight,As at Achilles’ self!
beneath thy dartLies slain the great Achilles’ dearer part.Thou from the mighty
dead those arms hast torn,Which once the greatest of mankind had worn.Yet live!
I give thee one illustrious day,A blaze of glory ere thou fad’st away.For ah! no
more Andromache shall comeWith joyful tears to welcome Hector home;No more
officious, with endearing charms,From thy tired limbs unbrace Pelides’
arms!”Then with his sable brow he gave the nodThat seals his word; the sanction
of the god.The stubborn arms (by Jove’s command disposed)Conform’d spontaneous,
and around him closed:Fill’d with the god, enlarged his members grew,Through all
his veins a sudden vigour flew,The blood in brisker tides began to roll,And Mars
himself came rushing on his soul.Exhorting loud through all the field he
strode,And look’d, and moved, Achilles, or a god.Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon,
he inspires,Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires;The great Thersilochus
like fury found,Asteropaeus kindled at the sound,And Ennomus, in augury
renown’d.“Hear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumber’d bandsOf neighbouring nations,
or of distant lands!’Twas not for state we summon’d you so far,To boast our
numbers, and the pomp of war:Ye came to fight; a valiant foe to chase,To save
our present, and our future race.For this, our wealth, our products, you
enjoy,And glean the relics of exhausted Troy.Now then, to conquer or to die
prepare;To die or conquer are the terms of war.Whatever hand shall win Patroclus
slain,Whoe’er shall drag him to the Trojan train,With Hector’s self shall equal
honours claim;With Hector part the spoil, and share the fame.”Fired by his
words, the troops dismiss their fears,They join, they thicken, they protend
their spears;Full on the Greeks they drive in firm array,And each from Ajax
hopes the glorious prey:Vain hope! what numbers shall the field o’erspread,What
victims perish round the mighty dead!Great Ajax mark’d the growing storm from
far,And thus bespoke his brother of the war:“Our fatal day, alas! is come, my
friend;And all our wars and glories at an end!’Tis not this corse alone we guard
in vain,Condemn’d to vultures on the Trojan plain;We too must yield: the same
sad fate must fallOn thee, on me, perhaps, my friend, on all.See what a tempest
direful Hector spreads,And lo! it bursts, it thunders on our heads!Call on our
Greeks, if any hear the call,The bravest Greeks: this hour demands them all.”The
warrior raised his voice, and wide aroundThe field re-echoed the distressful
sound.“O chiefs! O princes, to whose hand is givenThe rule of men; whose glory
is from heaven!Whom with due honours both Atrides grace:Ye guides and guardians
of our Argive race!All, whom this well-known voice shall reach from far,All,
whom I see not through this cloud of war;Come all! let generous rage your arms
employ,And save Patroclus from the dogs of Troy.”Oilean Ajax first the voice
obey’d,Swift was his pace, and ready was his aid:Next him Idomeneus, more slow
with age,And Merion, burning with a hero’s rage.The long-succeeding numbers who
can name?But all were Greeks, and eager all for fame.Fierce to the charge great
Hector led the throng;Whole Troy embodied rush’d with shouts along.Thus, when a
mountain billow foams and raves,Where some swoln river disembogues his
waves,Full in the mouth is stopp’d the rushing tide,The boiling ocean works from
side to side,The river trembles to his utmost shore,And distant rocks re-bellow
to the roar.Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian bandWith brazen shields in
horrid circle stand.Jove, pouring darkness o’er the mingled fight,Conceals the
warriors’ shining helms in night:To him, the chief for whom the hosts contendHad
lived not hateful, for he lived a friend:Dead he protects him with superior
care.Nor dooms his carcase to the birds of air.[Illustration: ] FIGHT FOR THE
BODY OF PATROCLUSThe first attack the Grecians scarce sustain,Repulsed, they
yield; the Trojans seize the slain.Then fierce they rally, to revenge led onBy
the swift rage of Ajax Telamon.(Ajax to Peleus’ son the second name,In graceful
stature next, and next in fame.)With headlong force the foremost ranks he
tore;So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar,And rudely scatters, for a
distance round,The frighted hunter and the baying hound.The son of Lethus, brave
Pelasgus’ heir,Hippothous, dragg’d the carcase through the war;The sinewy ankles
bored, the feet he boundWith thongs inserted through the double wound:Inevitable
fate o’ertakes the deed;Doom’d by great Ajax’ vengeful lance to bleed:It cleft
the helmet’s brazen cheeks in twain;The shatter’d crest and horse-hair strow the
plain:With nerves relax’d he tumbles to the ground:The brain comes gushing
through the ghastly wound:He drops Patroclus’ foot, and o’er him spread,Now lies
a sad companion of the dead:Far from Larissa lies, his native air,And ill
requites his parents’ tender care.Lamented youth! in life’s first bloom he
fell,Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.Once more at Ajax Hector’s javelin
flies;The Grecian marking, as it cut the skies,Shunn’d the descending death;
which hissing on,Stretch’d in the dust the great Iphytus’ son,Schedius the
brave, of all the Phocian kindThe boldest warrior and the noblest mind:In little
Panope, for strength renown’d,He held his seat, and ruled the realms
around.Plunged in his throat, the weapon drank his blood,And deep transpiercing
through the shoulder stood;In clanging arms the hero fell and allThe fields
resounded with his weighty fall.Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends,The
Telamonian lance his belly rends;The hollow armour burst before the stroke,And
through the wound the rushing entrails broke:In strong convulsions panting on
the sandsHe lies, and grasps the dust with dying hands.Struck at the sight,
recede the Trojan train:The shouting Argives strip the heroes slain.And now had
Troy, by Greece compell’d to yield,Fled to her ramparts, and resign’d the
field;Greece, in her native fortitude elate,With Jove averse, had turn’d the
scale of fate:But Phœbus urged Æneas to the fight;He seem’d like aged Periphas
to sight:(A herald in Anchises’ love grown old,Revered for prudence, and with
prudence bold.)Thus he—“What methods yet, O chief! remain,To save your Troy,
though heaven its fall ordain?There have been heroes, who, by virtuous care,By
valour, numbers, and by arts of war,Have forced the powers to spare a sinking
state,And gain’d at length the glorious odds of fate:But you, when fortune
smiles, when Jove declaresHis partial favour, and assists your wars,Your
shameful efforts ’gainst yourselves employ,And force the unwilling god to ruin
Troy.”Æneas through the form assumed descriesThe power conceal’d, and thus to
Hector cries:“Oh lasting shame! to our own fears a prey,We seek our ramparts,
and desert the day.A god, nor is he less, my bosom warms,And tells me, Jove
asserts the Trojan arms.”He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew:The bold
example all his hosts pursue.Then, first, Leocritus beneath him bled,In vain
beloved by valiant Lycomede;Who view’d his fall, and, grieving at the
chance,Swift to revenge it sent his angry lance;The whirling lance, with
vigorous force address’d,Descends, and pants in Apisaon’s breast;From rich
Paeonia’s vales the warrior came,Next thee, Asteropeus! in place and
fame.Asteropeus with grief beheld the slain,And rush’d to combat, but he rush’d
in vain:Indissolubly firm, around the dead,Rank within rank, on buckler buckler
spread,And hemm’d with bristled spears, the Grecians stood,A brazen bulwark, and
an iron wood.Great Ajax eyes them with incessant care,And in an orb contracts
the crowded war,Close in their ranks commands to fight or fall,And stands the
centre and the soul of all:Fix’d on the spot they war, and wounded, wound;A
sanguine torrent steeps the reeking ground:On heaps the Greeks, on heaps the
Trojans bled,And, thickening round them, rise the hills of dead.Greece, in close
order, and collected might,Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering
fight;Fierce as conflicting fires the combat burns,And now it rises, now it
sinks by turns.In one thick darkness all the fight was lost;The sun, the moon,
and all the ethereal hostSeem’d as extinct: day ravish’d from their eyes,And all
heaven’s splendours blotted from the skies.Such o’er Patroclus’ body hung the
night,The rest in sunshine fought, and open light;Unclouded there, the aerial
azure spread,No vapour rested on the mountain’s head,The golden sun pour’d forth
a stronger ray,And all the broad expansion flamed with day.Dispersed around the
plain, by fits they fight,And here and there their scatter’d arrows light:But
death and darkness o’er the carcase spread,There burn’d the war, and there the
mighty bled.Meanwhile the sons of Nestor, in the rear,(Their fellows routed,)
toss the distant spear,And skirmish wide: so Nestor gave command,When from the
ships he sent the Pylian band.The youthful brothers thus for fame contend,Nor
knew the fortune of Achilles’ friend;In thought they view’d him still, with
martial joy,Glorious in arms, and dealing death to Troy.But round the corse the
heroes pant for breath,And thick and heavy grows the work of death:O’erlabour’d
now, with dust, and sweat, and gore,Their knees, their legs, their feet, are
covered o’er;Drops follow drops, the clouds on clouds arise,And carnage clogs
their hands, and darkness fills their eyes.As when a slaughter’d bull’s yet
reeking hide,Strain’d with full force, and tugg’d from side to side,The brawny
curriers stretch; and labour o’erThe extended surface, drunk with fat and
gore:So tugging round the corse both armies stood;The mangled body bathed in
sweat and blood;While Greeks and Ilians equal strength employ,Now to the ships
to force it, now to Troy.Not Pallas’ self, her breast when fury warms,Nor he
whose anger sets the world in arms,Could blame this scene; such rage, such
horror reign’d;Such, Jove to honour the great dead ordain’d.Achilles in his
ships at distance lay,Nor knew the fatal fortune of the day;He, yet unconscious
of Patroclus’ fall,In dust extended under Ilion’s wall,Expects him glorious from
the conquered plain,And for his wish’d return prepares in vain;Though well he
knew, to make proud Ilion bendWas more than heaven had destined to his
friend.Perhaps to him: this Thetis had reveal’d;The rest, in pity to her son,
conceal’d.Still raged the conflict round the hero dead,And heaps on heaps by
mutual wounds they bled.“Cursed be the man (even private Greeks would say)Who
dares desert this well-disputed day!First may the cleaving earth before our
eyesGape wide, and drink our blood for sacrifice;First perish all, ere haughty
Troy shall boastWe lost Patroclus, and our glory lost!”Thus they: while with one
voice the Trojans said,“Grant this day, Jove! or heap us on the dead!”Then clash
their sounding arms; the clangours rise,And shake the brazen concave of the
skies.Meantime, at distance from the scene of blood,The pensive steeds of great
Achilles stood:Their godlike master slain before their eyes,They wept, and
shared in human miseries.[248]In vain Automedon now shakes the rein,Now plies
the lash, and soothes and threats in vain;Nor to the fight nor Hellespont they
go,Restive they stood, and obstinate in woe:Still as a tombstone, never to be
moved,On some good man or woman unreprovedLays its eternal weight; or fix’d, as
standsA marble courser by the sculptor’s hands,Placed on the hero’s grave. Along
their faceThe big round drops coursed down with silent pace,Conglobing on the
dust. Their manes, that lateCircled their arched necks, and waved in
state,Trail’d on the dust beneath the yoke were spread,And prone to earth was
hung their languid head:Nor Jove disdain’d to cast a pitying look,While thus
relenting to the steeds he spoke:“Unhappy coursers of immortal strain,Exempt
from age, and deathless, now in vain;Did we your race on mortal man bestow,Only,
alas! to share in mortal woe?For ah! what is there of inferior birth,That
breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth;What wretched creature of what
wretched kind,Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind?A miserable race! but
cease to mourn:For not by you shall Priam’s son be borneHigh on the splendid
car: one glorious prizeHe rashly boasts: the rest our will denies.Ourself will
swiftness to your nerves impart,Ourself with rising spirits swell your
heart.Automedon your rapid flight shall bearSafe to the navy through the storm
of war.For yet ’tis given to Troy to ravage o’erThe field, and spread her
slaughters to the shore;The sun shall see her conquer, till his fallWith sacred
darkness shades the face of all.”He said; and breathing in the immortal
horseExcessive spirit, urged them to the course;From their high manes they shake
the dust, and bearThe kindling chariot through the parted war:So flies a vulture
through the clamorous trainOf geese, that scream, and scatter round the
plain.From danger now with swiftest speed they flew,And now to conquest with
like speed pursue;Sole in the seat the charioteer remains,Now plies the javelin,
now directs the reins:Him brave Alcimedon beheld distress’d,Approach’d the
chariot, and the chief address’d:“What god provokes thee rashly thus to
dare,Alone, unaided, in the thickest war?Alas! thy friend is slain, and Hector
wieldsAchilles’ arms triumphant in the fields.”“In happy time (the charioteer
replies)The bold Alcimedon now greets my eyes;No Greek like him the heavenly
steeds restrains,Or holds their fury in suspended reins:Patroclus, while he
lived, their rage could tame,But now Patroclus is an empty name!To thee I yield
the seat, to thee resignThe ruling charge: the task of fight be mine.”He said.
Alcimedon, with active heat,Snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat.His
friend descends. The chief of Troy descried,And call’d Æneas fighting near his
side.“Lo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored,Achilles’ car, deserted of its
lord!The glorious steeds our ready arms invite,Scarce their weak drivers guide
them through the fight.Can such opponents stand when we assail?Unite thy force,
my friend, and we prevail.”The son of Venus to the counsel yields;Then o’er
their backs they spread their solid shields:With brass refulgent the broad
surface shined,And thick bull-hides the spacious concave lined.Them Chromius
follows, Aretus succeeds;Each hopes the conquest of the lofty steeds:In vain,
brave youths, with glorious hopes ye burn,In vain advance! not fated to
return.Unmov’d, Automedon attends the fight,Implores the Eternal, and collects
his might.Then turning to his friend, with dauntless mind:“Oh keep the foaming
coursers close behind!Full on my shoulders let their nostrils blow,For hard the
fight, determined is the foe;’Tis Hector comes: and when he seeks the prize,War
knows no mean; he wins it or he dies.”Then through the field he sends his voice
aloud,And calls the Ajaces from the warring crowd,With great Atrides. “Hither
turn, (he said,)Turn where distress demands immediate aid;The dead, encircled by
his friends, forego,And save the living from a fiercer foe.Unhelp’d we stand,
unequal to engageThe force of Hector, and Æneas’ rage:Yet mighty as they are, my
force to proveIs only mine: the event belongs to Jove.”He spoke, and high the
sounding javelin flung,Which pass’d the shield of Aretus the young:It pierced
his belt, emboss’d with curious art,Then in the lower belly struck the dart.As
when a ponderous axe, descending full,Cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny
bull:[249]Struck ’twixt the horns, he springs with many a bound,Then tumbling
rolls enormous on the ground:Thus fell the youth; the air his soul received,And
the spear trembled as his entrails heaved.Now at Automedon the Trojan
foeDischarged his lance; the meditated blow,Stooping, he shunn’d; the javelin
idly fled,And hiss’d innoxious o’er the hero’s head;Deep rooted in the ground,
the forceful spearIn long vibrations spent its fury there.With clashing
falchions now the chiefs had closed,But each brave Ajax heard, and
interposed;Nor longer Hector with his Trojans stood,But left their slain
companion in his blood:His arms Automedon divests, and cries,“Accept, Patroclus,
this mean sacrifice:Thus have I soothed my griefs, and thus have paid,Poor as it
is, some offering to thy shade.”So looks the lion o’er a mangled boar,All grim
with rage, and horrible with gore;High on the chariot at one bound he sprung,And
o’er his seat the bloody trophies hung.And now Minerva from the realms of
airDescends impetuous, and renews the war;For, pleased at length the Grecian
arms to aid,The lord of thunders sent the blue-eyed maid.As when high Jove
denouncing future woe,O’er the dark clouds extends his purple bow,(In sign of
tempests from the troubled air,Or from the rage of man, destructive war,)The
drooping cattle dread the impending skies,And from his half-till’d field the
labourer flies:In such a form the goddess round her drewA livid cloud, and to
the battle flew.Assuming Phœnix’ shape on earth she falls,And in his well-known
voice to Sparta calls:“And lies Achilles’ friend, beloved by all,A prey to dogs
beneath the Trojan wall?What shame 'o Greece for future times to tell,To thee
the greatest in whose cause he fell!”“O chief, O father! (Atreus’ son replies)O
full of days! by long experience wise!What more desires my soul, than here
unmovedTo guard the body of the man I loved?Ah, would Minerva send me strength
to rearThis wearied arm, and ward the storm of war!But Hector, like the rage of
fire, we dread,And Jove’s own glories blaze around his head!”Pleased to be first
of all the powers address’d,She breathes new vigour in her hero’s breast,And
fills with keen revenge, with fell despite,Desire of blood, and rage, and lust
of fight.So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all o’er),Repulsed in vain, and
thirsty still of gore;(Bold son of air and heat) on angry wingsUntamed, untired,
he turns, attacks, and stings.Fired with like ardour fierce Atrides flew,And
sent his soul with every lance he threw.There stood a Trojan, not unknown to
fame,Aëtion’s son, and Podes was his name:With riches honour’d, and with courage
bless’d,By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest;Through his broad belt the
spear a passage found,And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound.Sudden at
Hector’s side Apollo stood,Like Phaenops, Asius’ son, appear’d the god;(Asius
the great, who held his wealthy reignIn fair Abydos, by the rolling main.)“Oh
prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame!What Grecian now shall tremble at
thy name?Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield,A chief once thought no terror of
the field?Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prizeHe bears victorious, while our
army flies:By the same arm illustrious Podes bled;The friend of Hector,
unrevenged, is dead!”This heard, o’er Hector spreads a cloud of woe,Rage lifts
his lance, and drives him on the foe.But now the Eternal shook his sable
shield,That shaded Ide and all the subject fieldBeneath its ample verge. A
rolling cloudInvolved the mount; the thunder roar’d aloud;The affrighted hills
from their foundations nod,And blaze beneath the lightnings of the god:At one
regard of his all-seeing eyeThe vanquish’d triumph, and the victors fly.Then
trembled Greece: the flight Peneleus led;For as the brave Bœotian turn’d his
headTo face the foe, Polydamas drew near,And razed his shoulder with a shorten’d
spear:By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the plain,Pierced through the wrist; and
raging with the pain,Grasps his once formidable lance in vain.As Hector
follow’d, Idomen address’dThe flaming javelin to his manly breast;The brittle
point before his corslet yields;Exulting Troy with clamour fills the fields:High
on his chariots the Cretan stood,The son of Priam whirl’d the massive wood.But
erring from its aim, the impetuous spearStruck to the dust the squire and
charioteerOf martial Merion: Coeranus his name,Who left fair Lyctus for the
fields of fame.On foot bold Merion fought; and now laid low,Had graced the
triumphs of his Trojan foe,But the brave squire the ready coursers brought,And
with his life his master’s safety bought.Between his cheek and ear the weapon
went,The teeth it shatter’d, and the tongue it rent.Prone from the seat he
tumbles to the plain;His dying hand forgets the falling rein:This Merion
reaches, bending from the car,And urges to desert the hopeless war:Idomeneus
consents; the lash applies;And the swift chariot to the navy flies.Not Ajax less
the will of heaven descried,And conquest shifting to the Trojan side,Turn’d by
the hand of Jove. Then thus begun,To Atreus’s seed, the godlike Telamon:“Alas!
who sees not Jove’s almighty handTransfers the glory to the Trojan band?Whether
the weak or strong discharge the dart,He guides each arrow to a Grecian
heart:Not so our spears; incessant though they rain,He suffers every lance to
fall in vain.Deserted of the god, yet let us tryWhat human strength and prudence
can supply;If yet this honour’d corse, in triumph borne,May glad the fleets that
hope not our return,Who tremble yet, scarce rescued from their fates,And still
hear Hector thundering at their gates.Some hero too must be despatch’d to
bearThe mournful message to Pelides’ ear;For sure he knows not, distant on the
shore,His friend, his loved Patroclus, is no more.But such a chief I spy not
through the host:The men, the steeds, the armies, all are lostIn general
darkness—Lord of earth and air!Oh king! Oh father! hear my humble prayer:Dispel
this cloud, the light of heaven restore;Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more:If
Greece must perish, we thy will obey,But let us perish in the face of day!”With
tears the hero spoke, and at his prayerThe god relenting clear’d the clouded
air;Forth burst the sun with all-enlightening ray;The blaze of armour flash’d
against the day.“Now, now, Atrides! cast around thy sight;If yet Antilochus
survives the fight,Let him to great Achilles’ ear conveyThe fatal news”—Atrides
hastes away.So turns the lion from the nightly fold,Though high in courage, and
with hunger bold,Long gall’d by herdsmen, and long vex’d by hounds,Stiff with
fatigue, and fretted sore with wounds;The darts fly round him from a hundred
hands,And the red terrors of the blazing brands:Till late, reluctant, at the
dawn of daySour he departs, and quits the untasted prey,So moved Atrides from
his dangerous placeWith weary limbs, but with unwilling pace;The foe, he fear’d,
might yet Patroclus gain,And much admonish’d, much adjured his train:“O guard
these relics to your charge consign’d,And bear the merits of the dead in
mind;How skill’d he was in each obliging art;The mildest manners, and the
gentlest heart:He was, alas! but fate decreed his end,In death a hero, as in
life a friend!”So parts the chief; from rank to rank he flew,And round on all
sides sent his piercing view.As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eyeOf all
that wings the mid aërial sky,The sacred eagle, from his walks aboveLooks down,
and sees the distant thicket move;Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering
hare,Snatches his life amid the clouds of air.Not with less quickness, his
exerted sightPass’d this and that way, through the ranks of fight:Till on the
left the chief he sought, he found,Cheering his men, and spreading deaths
around:To him the king: “Beloved of Jove! draw near,For sadder tidings never
touch’d thy ear;Thy eyes have witness’d what a fatal turn!How Ilion triumphs,
and the Achaians mourn.This is not all: Patroclus, on the shoreNow pale and
dead, shall succour Greece no more.Fly to the fleet, this instant fly, and
tellThe sad Achilles, how his loved-one fell:He too may haste the naked corse to
gain:The arms are Hector’s, who despoil’d the slain.”The youthful warrior heard
with silent woe,From his fair eyes the tears began to flow:Big with the mighty
grief, he strove to sayWhat sorrow dictates, but no word found way.To brave
Laodocus his arms he flung,Who, near him wheeling, drove his steeds along;Then
ran the mournful message to impart,With tearful eyes, and with dejected
heart.Swift fled the youth: nor Menelaus stands(Though sore distress’d) to aid
the Pylian bands;But bids bold Thrasymede those troops sustain;Himself returns
to his Patroclus slain.“Gone is Antilochus (the hero said);But hope not,
warriors, for Achilles’ aid:Though fierce his rage, unbounded be his
woe,Unarm’d, he fights not with the Trojan foe.’Tis in our hands alone our hopes
remain,’Tis our own vigour must the dead regain,And save ourselves, while with
impetuous hateTroy pours along, and this way rolls our fate.”“’Tis well (said
Ajax), be it then thy care,With Merion’s aid, the weighty corse to rear;Myself,
and my bold brother will sustainThe shock of Hector and his charging train:Nor
fear we armies, fighting side by side;What Troy can dare, we have already
tried,Have tried it, and have stood.” The hero said.High from the ground the
warriors heave the dead.A general clamour rises at the sight:Loud shout the
Trojans, and renew the fight.Not fiercer rush along the gloomy wood,With rage
insatiate, and with thirst of blood,Voracious hounds, that many a length
beforeTheir furious hunters, drive the wounded boar;But if the savage turns his
glaring eye,They howl aloof, and round the forest fly.Thus on retreating Greece
the Trojans pour,Wave their thick falchions, and their javelins shower:But Ajax
turning, to their fears they yield,All pale they tremble and forsake the
field.While thus aloft the hero’s corse they bear,Behind them rages all the
storm of war:Confusion, tumult, horror, o’er the throngOf men, steeds, chariots,
urged the rout along:Less fierce the winds with rising flames conspireTo whelm
some city under waves of fire;Now sink in gloomy clouds the proud abodes,Now
crack the blazing temples of the gods;The rumbling torrent through the ruin
rolls,And sheets of smoke mount heavy to the poles.The heroes sweat beneath
their honour’d load:As when two mules, along the rugged road,From the steep
mountain with exerted strengthDrag some vast beam, or mast’s unwieldy
length;Inly they groan, big drops of sweat distil,The enormous timber lumbering
down the hill:So these—Behind, the bulk of Ajax stands,And breaks the torrent of
the rushing bands.Thus when a river swell’d with sudden rainsSpreads his broad
waters o’er the level plains,Some interposing hill the stream divides,And breaks
its force, and turns the winding tides.Still close they follow, close the rear
engage;Æneas storms, and Hector foams with rage:While Greece a heavy, thick
retreat maintains,Wedged in one body, like a flight of cranes,That shriek
incessant, while the falcon, hungHigh on poised pinions, threats their callow
young.So from the Trojan chiefs the Grecians fly,Such the wild terror, and the
mingled cry:Within, without the trench, and all the way,Strow’d in bright heaps,
their arms and armour lay;Such horror Jove impress’d! yet still proceedsThe work
of death, and still the battle bleeds.[Illustration: ] VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE
GEMBOOK XVIII.ARGUMENT.THE GRIEF OF ACHILLES, AND NEW ARMOUR MADE HIM BY
VULCAN.The news of the death of Patroclus is brought to Achilles byAntilochus.
Thetis, hearing his lamentations, comes with all her sea-nymphs to comfort him.
The speeches of the mother and son on thisoccasion. Iris appears to Achilles by
the command of Juno, and ordershim to show himself at the head of the
intrenchments. The sight of himturns the fortunes of the day, and the body of
Patroclus is carried offby the Greeks. The Trojans call a council, where Hector
and Polydamasdisagree in their opinions: but the advice of the former prevails,
toremain encamped in the field. The grief of Achilles over the body ofPatroclus.
Thetis goes to the palace of Vulcan to obtain new arms for her son. The
description of the wonderful works of Vulcan: and, lastly, that noble one of the
shield of Achilles. The latter part of the nine-and-twentieth day, and the night
ensuing, take up this book: the scene is at Achilles’ tent on the sea-shore,
from whence it changes to the palace of Vulcan.Thus like the rage of fire the
combat burns,[250]And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.Meanwhile, where
Hellespont’s broad waters flow,Stood Nestor’s son, the messenger of woe:There
sat Achilles, shaded by his sails,On hoisted yards extended to the gales;Pensive
he sat; for all that fate design’dRose in sad prospect to his boding mind.Thus
to his soul he said: “Ah! what constrainsThe Greeks, late victors, now to quit
the plains?Is this the day, which heaven so long agoOrdain’d, to sink me with
the weight of woe?(So Thetis warn’d;) when by a Trojan handThe bravest of the
Myrmidonian bandShould lose the light! Fulfilled is that decree;Fallen is the
warrior, and Patroclus he!In vain I charged him soon to quit the plain,And
warn’d to shun Hectorean force in vain!”Thus while he thinks, Antilochus
appears,And tells the melancholy tale with tears.“Sad tidings, son of Peleus!
thou must hear;And wretched I, the unwilling messenger!Dead is Patroclus! For
his corse they fight;His naked corse: his arms are Hector’s right.”A sudden
horror shot through all the chief,And wrapp’d his senses in the cloud of
grief;Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spreadThe scorching ashes o’er
his graceful head;His purple garments, and his golden hairs,Those he deforms
with dust, and these he tears;On the hard soil his groaning breast he threw,And
roll’d and grovell’d, as to earth he grew.The virgin captives, with disorder’d
charms,(Won by his own, or by Patroclus’ arms,)Rush’d from their tents with
cries; and gathering round,Beat their white breasts, and fainted on the
ground:While Nestor’s son sustains a manlier part,And mourns the warrior with a
warrior’s heart;Hangs on his arms, amidst his frantic woe,And oft prevents the
meditated blow.Far in the deep abysses of the main,[251]With hoary Nereus, and
the watery train,The mother-goddess from her crystal throneHeard his loud cries,
and answer’d groan for groan.The circling Nereids with their mistress weep,And
all the sea-green sisters of the deep.Thalia, Glauce (every watery name),Nesaea
mild, and silver Spio came:Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh,And the blue languish
of soft Alia’s eye.Their locks Actaea and Limnoria rear,Then Proto, Doris,
Panope appear,Thoa, Pherusa, Doto, Melita;Agave gentle, and Amphithoe gay:Next
Callianira, Callianassa showTheir sister looks; Dexamene the slow,And swift
Dynamene, now cut the tides:Iaera now the verdant wave divides:Nemertes with
Apseudes lifts the head,Bright Galatea quits her pearly bed;These Orythia,
Clymene, attend,Maera, Amphinome, the train extend;And black Janira, and Janassa
fair,And Amatheia with her amber hair.All these, and all that deep in ocean
heldTheir sacred seats, the glimmering grotto fill’d;Each beat her ivory breast
with silent woe,Till Thetis’ sorrows thus began to flow:“Hear me, and judge, ye
sisters of the main!How just a cause has Thetis to complain!How wretched, were I
mortal, were my fate!How more than wretched in the immortal state!Sprung from my
bed a godlike hero came,The bravest far that ever bore the name;Like some fair
olive, by my careful handHe grew, he flourish’d and adorn’d the land!To Troy I
sent him: but the fates ordainHe never, never must return again.So short a space
the light of heaven to view,So short, alas! and fill’d with anguish too!Hear how
his sorrows echo through the shore!I cannot ease them, but I must deplore;I go
at least to bear a tender part,And mourn my loved-one with a mother’s heart.”She
said, and left the caverns of the main,All bathed in tears; the melancholy
trainAttend her way. Wide-opening part the tides,While the long pomp the silver
wave divides.Approaching now, they touch’d the Trojan land;Then, two by two,
ascended up the strand.The immortal mother, standing close besideHer mournful
offspring, to his sighs replied;Along the coast their mingled clamours ran,And
thus the silver-footed dame began:“Why mourns my son? thy late preferr’d
requestThe god has granted, and the Greeks distress’d:Why mourns my son? thy
anguish let me share,Reveal the cause, and trust a parent’s care.”He, deeply
groaning—“To this cureless grief,Not even the Thunderer’s favour brings
relief.Patroclus—Ah!—say, goddess, can I boastA pleasure now? revenge itself is
lost;Patroclus, loved of all my martial train,Beyond mankind, beyond myself is
slain!Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestow’dOn Peleus; Hector bears
the glorious load.Cursed be that day, when all the powers aboveThy charms
submitted to a mortal love:O hadst thou still, a sister of the main,Pursued the
pleasures of the watery reign:And happier Peleus, less ambitious, ledA mortal
beauty to his equal bed!Ere the sad fruit of thy unhappy wombHad caused such
sorrows past, and woes to come.For soon, alas! that wretched offspring slain,New
woes, new sorrows, shall create again.’Tis not in fate the alternate now to
give;Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live.Let me revenge it on proud Hector’s
heart,Let his last spirit smoke upon my dart;On these conditions will I breathe:
till then,I blush to walk among the race of men.”A flood of tears, at this, the
goddess shed:“Ah then, I see thee dying, see thee dead!When Hector falls, thou
diest.”—“Let Hector die,And let me fall! (Achilles made reply)Far lies Patroclus
from his native plain!He fell, and falling, wish’d my aid in vain.Ah then, since
from this miserable dayI cast all hope of my return away;Since, unrevenged, a
hundred ghosts demandThe fate of Hector from Achilles’ hand;Since here, for
brutal courage far renown’d,I live an idle burden to the ground,(Others in
council famed for nobler skill,More useful to preserve, than I to kill,)Let
me—But oh! ye gracious powers above!Wrath and revenge from men and gods
remove:Far, far too dear to every mortal breast,Sweet to the soul, as honey to
the taste:Gathering like vapours of a noxious kindFrom fiery blood, and
darkening all the mind.Me Agamemnon urged to deadly hate;’Tis past—I quell it; I
resign to fate.Yes—I will meet the murderer of my friend;Or (if the gods ordain
it) meet my end.The stroke of fate the strongest cannot shun:The great Alcides,
Jove’s unequall’d son,To Juno’s hate, at length resign’d his breath,And sunk the
victim of all-conquering death.So shall Achilles fall! stretch’d pale and
dead,No more the Grecian hope, or Trojan dread!Let me, this instant, rush into
the fields,And reap what glory life’s short harvest yields.Shall I not force
some widow’d dame to tearWith frantic hands her long dishevell’d hair?Shall I
not force her breast to heave with sighs,And the soft tears to trickle from her
eyes?Yes, I shall give the fair those mournful charms—In vain you hold me—Hence!
my arms! my arms!—Soon shall the sanguine torrent spread so wide,That all shall
know Achilles swells the tide.”“My son (coerulean Thetis made reply,To fate
submitting with a secret sigh,)The host to succour, and thy friends to save,Is
worthy thee; the duty of the brave.But canst thou, naked, issue to the
plains?Thy radiant arms the Trojan foe detains.Insulting Hector bears the spoils
on high,But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.Yet, yet awhile thy generous
ardour stay;Assured, I meet thee at the dawn of day,Charged with refulgent arms
(a glorious load),Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god.”Then turning to the
daughters of the main,The goddess thus dismiss’d her azure train:“Ye sister
Nereids! to your deeps descend;Haste, and our father’s sacred seat attend;I go
to find the architect divine,Where vast Olympus’ starry summits shine:So tell
our hoary sire”—This charge she gave:The sea-green sisters plunge beneath the
wave:Thetis once more ascends the bless’d abodes,And treads the brazen threshold
of the gods.[Illustration: ] THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE
SEAAnd now the Greeks from furious Hector’s force,Urge to broad Hellespont their
headlong course;Nor yet their chiefs Patroclus’ body boreSafe through the
tempest to the tented shore.The horse, the foot, with equal fury join’d,Pour’d
on the rear, and thunder’d close behind:And like a flame through fields of
ripen’d corn,The rage of Hector o’er the ranks was borne.Thrice the slain hero
by the foot he drew;Thrice to the skies the Trojan clamours flew:As oft the
Ajaces his assault sustain;But check’d, he turns; repuls’d, attacks again.With
fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires,Nor yields a step, nor from his
post retires:So watchful shepherds strive to force, in vain,The hungry lion from
a carcase slain.Even yet Patroclus had he borne away,And all the glories of the
extended day,Had not high Juno from the realms of air,Secret, despatch’d her
trusty messenger.The various goddess of the showery bow,Shot in a whirlwind to
the shore below;To great Achilles at his ships she came,And thus began the
many-colour’d dame:“Rise, son of Peleus! rise, divinely brave!Assist the combat,
and Patroclus save:For him the slaughter to the fleet they spread,And fall by
mutual wounds around the dead.To drag him back to Troy the foe contends:Nor with
his death the rage of Hector ends:A prey to dogs he dooms the corse to lie,And
marks the place to fix his head on high.Rise, and prevent (if yet you think of
fame)Thy friend’s disgrace, thy own eternal shame!”“Who sends thee, goddess,
from the ethereal skies?”Achilles thus. And Iris thus replies:“I come, Pelides!
from the queen of Jove,The immortal empress of the realms above;Unknown to him
who sits remote on high,Unknown to all the synod of the sky.”“Thou comest in
vain (he cries, with fury warm’d);Arms I have none, and can I fight
unarm’d?Unwilling as I am, of force I stay,Till Thetis bring me at the dawn of
dayVulcanian arms: what other can I wield,Except the mighty Telamonian
shield?That, in my friend’s defence, has Ajax spread,While his strong lance
around him heaps the dead:The gallant chief defends Menoetius’ son,And does what
his Achilles should have done.”“Thy want of arms (said Iris) well we know;But
though unarm’d, yet clad in terrors, go!Let but Achilles o’er yon trench
appear,Proud Troy shall tremble, and consent to fear;Greece from one glance of
that tremendous eyeShall take new courage, and disdain to fly.”She spoke, and
pass’d in air. The hero rose:Her ægis Pallas o’er his shoulder throws;Around his
brows a golden cloud she spread;A stream of glory flamed above his head.As when
from some beleaguer’d town ariseThe smokes, high curling to the shaded
skies;(Seen from some island, o’er the main afar,When men distress’d hang out
the sign of war;)Soon as the sun in ocean hides his rays,Thick on the hills the
flaming beacons blaze;With long-projected beams the seas are bright,And heaven’s
high arch reflects the ruddy light:So from Achilles’ head the splendours
rise,Reflecting blaze on blaze against the skies.Forth march’d the chief, and
distant from the crowd,High on the rampart raised his voice aloud;With her own
shout Minerva swells the sound;Troy starts astonish’d, and the shores rebound.As
the loud trumpet’s brazen mouth from farWith shrilling clangour sounds the alarm
of war,Struck from the walls, the echoes float on high,And the round bulwarks
and thick towers reply;So high his brazen voice the hero rear’d:Hosts dropp’d
their arms, and trembled as they heard:And back the chariots roll, and coursers
bound,And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.Aghast they see the living
lightnings play,And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.Thrice from the
trench his dreadful voice he raised,And thrice they fled, confounded and
amazed.Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rush’dOn their own spears, by their
own chariots crush’d:While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtainThe
long-contended carcase of the slain.A lofty bier the breathless warrior
bears:Around, his sad companions melt in tears.But chief Achilles, bending down
his head,Pours unavailing sorrows o’er the dead,Whom late triumphant, with his
steeds and car,He sent refulgent to the field of war;(Unhappy change!) now
senseless, pale, he found,Stretch’d forth, and gash’d with many a gaping
wound.Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way,In ocean’s waves the unwilling
light of dayQuench’d his red orb, at Juno’s high command,And from their labours
eased the Achaian band.The frighted Trojans (panting from the war,Their steeds
unharness’d from the weary car)A sudden council call’d: each chief appear’dIn
haste, and standing; for to sit they fear’d.’Twas now no season for prolong’d
debate;They saw Achilles, and in him their fate.Silent they stood: Polydamas at
last,Skill’d to discern the future by the past,The son of Panthus, thus
express’d his fears(The friend of Hector, and of equal years;The self-same night
to both a being gave,One wise in council, one in action brave):[Illustration: ]
JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET“In free debate, my friends, your sentence
speak;For me, I move, before the morning break,To raise our camp: too dangerous
here our post,Far from Troy walls, and on a naked coast.I deem’d not Greece so
dreadful, while engagedIn mutual feuds her king and hero raged;Then, while we
hoped our armies might prevailWe boldly camp’d beside a thousand sail.I dread
Pelides now: his rage of mindNot long continues to the shores confined,Nor to
the fields, where long in equal frayContending nations won and lost the day;For
Troy, for Troy, shall henceforth be the strife,And the hard contest not for
fame, but life.Haste then to Ilion, while the favouring nightDetains these
terrors, keeps that arm from fight.If but the morrow’s sun behold us here,That
arm, those terrors, we shall feel, not fear;And hearts that now disdain, shall
leap with joy,If heaven permit them then to enter Troy.Let not my fatal prophecy
be true,Nor what I tremble but to think, ensue.Whatever be our fate, yet let us
tryWhat force of thought and reason can supply;Let us on counsel for our guard
depend;The town her gates and bulwarks shall defend.When morning dawns, our
well-appointed powers,Array’d in arms, shall line the lofty towers.Let the
fierce hero, then, when fury calls,Vent his mad vengeance on our rocky walls,Or
fetch a thousand circles round the plain,Till his spent coursers seek the fleet
again:So may his rage be tired, and labour’d down!And dogs shall tear him ere he
sack the town.”“Return! (said Hector, fired with stern disdain)What! coop whole
armies in our walls again?Was’t not enough, ye valiant warriors, say,Nine years
imprison’d in those towers ye lay?Wide o’er the world was Ilion famed of oldFor
brass exhaustless, and for mines of gold:But while inglorious in her walls we
stay’d,Sunk were her treasures, and her stores decay’d;The Phrygians now her
scatter’d spoils enjoy,And proud Mæonia wastes the fruits of Troy.Great Jove at
length my arms to conquest calls,And shuts the Grecians in their wooden
walls,Darest thou dispirit whom the gods incite?Flies any Trojan? I shall stop
his flight.To better counsel then attention lend;Take due refreshment, and the
watch attend.If there be one whose riches cost him care,Forth let him bring them
for the troops to share;’Tis better generously bestow’d on those,Than left the
plunder of our country’s foes.Soon as the morn the purple orient warms,Fierce on
yon navy will we pour our arms.If great Achilles rise in all his might,His be
the danger: I shall stand the fight.Honour, ye gods! or let me gain or give;And
live he glorious, whosoe’er shall live!Mars is our common lord, alike to all;And
oft the victor triumphs, but to fall.”The shouting host in loud applauses
join’d;So Pallas robb’d the many of their mind;To their own sense condemn’d, and
left to chooseThe worst advice, the better to refuse.While the long night
extends her sable reign,Around Patroclus mourn’d the Grecian train.Stern in
superior grief Pelides stood;Those slaughtering arms, so used to bathe in
blood,Now clasp his clay-cold limbs: then gushing startThe tears, and sighs
burst from his swelling heart.The lion thus, with dreadful anguish stung,Roars
through the desert, and demands his young;When the grim savage, to his rifled
denToo late returning, snuffs the track of men,And o’er the vales and o’er the
forest bounds;His clamorous grief the bellowing wood resounds.So grieves
Achilles; and, impetuous, ventsTo all his Myrmidons his loud laments.“In what
vain promise, gods! did I engage,When to console Menoetius’ feeble age,I vowed
his much-loved offspring to restore,Charged with rich spoils, to fair Opuntia’s
shore?[252]But mighty Jove cuts short, with just disdain,The long, long views of
poor designing man!One fate the warrior and the friend shall strike,And Troy’s
black sands must drink our blood alike:Me too a wretched mother shall deplore,An
aged father never see me more!Yet, my Patroclus! yet a space I stay,Then swift
pursue thee on the darksome way.Ere thy dear relics in the grave are laid,Shall
Hector’s head be offer’d to thy shade;That, with his arms, shall hang before thy
shrine;And twelve, the noblest of the Trojan line,Sacred to vengeance, by this
hand expire;Their lives effused around thy flaming pyre.Thus let me lie till
then! thus, closely press’d,Bathe thy cold face, and sob upon thy breast!While
Trojan captives here thy mourners stay,Weep all the night and murmur all the
day:Spoils of my arms, and thine; when, wasting wide,Our swords kept time, and
conquer’d side by side.”He spoke, and bade the sad attendants roundCleanse the
pale corse, and wash each honour’d wound.A massy caldron of stupendous frameThey
brought, and placed it o’er the rising flame:Then heap’d the lighted wood; the
flame dividesBeneath the vase, and climbs around the sides:In its wide womb they
pour the rushing stream;The boiling water bubbles to the brim.The body then they
bathe with pious toil,Embalm the wounds, anoint the limbs with oil,High on a bed
of state extended laid,And decent cover’d with a linen shade;Last o’er the dead
the milk-white veil they threw;That done, their sorrows and their sighs
renew.Meanwhile to Juno, in the realms above,(His wife and sister,) spoke
almighty Jove.“At last thy will prevails: great Peleus’ sonRises in arms: such
grace thy Greeks have won.Say (for I know not), is their race divine,And thou
the mother of that martial line?”“What words are these? (the imperial dame
replies,While anger flash’d from her majestic eyes)Succour like this a mortal
arm might lend,And such success mere human wit attend:And shall not I, the
second power above,Heaven’s queen, and consort of the thundering Jove,Say, shall
not I one nation’s fate command,Not wreak my vengeance on one guilty
land?”[Illustration: ] TRIPODSo they. Meanwhile the silver-footed dameReach’d
the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame!High-eminent amid the works divine,Where
heaven’s far-beaming brazen mansions shine.There the lame architect the goddess
found,Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round,While bathed in sweat from fire
to fire he flew;And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew.That day no common
task his labour claim’d:Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed,That placed
on living wheels of massy gold,(Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit
roll’dFrom place to place, around the bless’d abodesSelf-moved, obedient to the
beck of gods:For their fair handles now, o’erwrought with flowers,In moulds
prepared, the glowing ore he pours.Just as responsive to his thought the
frameStood prompt to move, the azure goddess came:Charis, his spouse, a grace
divinely fair,(With purple fillets round her braided hair,)Observed her
entering; her soft hand she press’d,And, smiling, thus the watery queen
address’d:“What, goddess! this unusual favour draws?All hail, and welcome!
whatsoe’er the cause;Till now a stranger, in a happy hourApproach, and taste the
dainties of the bower.”[Illustration: ] THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT
VULCANHigh on a throne, with stars of silver graced,And various artifice, the
queen she placed;A footstool at her feet: then calling, said,“Vulcan, draw near,
’tis Thetis asks your aid.”“Thetis (replied the god) our powers may claim,An
ever-dear, an ever-honour’d name!When my proud mother hurl’d me from the sky,(My
awkward form, it seems, displeased her eye,)She, and Eurynome, my griefs
redress’d,And soft received me on their silver breast.Even then these arts
employ’d my infant thought:Chains, bracelets, pendants, all their toys, I
wrought.Nine years kept secret in the dark abode,Secure I lay, conceal’d from
man and god:Deep in a cavern’d rock my days were led;The rushing ocean murmur’d
o’er my head.Now, since her presence glads our mansion, say,For such desert what
service can I pay?Vouchsafe, O Thetis! at our board to shareThe genial rites,
and hospitable fare;While I the labours of the forge forego,And bid the roaring
bellows cease to blow.”Then from his anvil the lame artist rose;Wide with
distorted legs oblique he goes,And stills the bellows, and (in order laid)Locks
in their chests his instruments of trade.Then with a sponge the sooty workman
dress’dHis brawny arms embrown’d, and hairy breast.With his huge sceptre graced,
and red attire,Came halting forth the sovereign of the fire:The monarch’s steps
two female forms uphold,That moved and breathed in animated gold;To whom was
voice, and sense, and science givenOf works divine (such wonders are in
heaven!)On these supported, with unequal gait,He reach’d the throne where
pensive Thetis sate;There placed beside her on the shining frame,He thus
address’d the silver-footed dame:“Thee, welcome, goddess! what occasion calls(So
long a stranger) to these honour’d walls?’Tis thine, fair Thetis, the command to
lay,And Vulcan’s joy and duty to obey.”[Illustration: ] VULCAN AND CHARIS
RECEIVING THETISTo whom the mournful mother thus replies:(The crystal drops
stood trembling in her eyes:)“O Vulcan! say, was ever breast divineSo pierced
with sorrows, so o’erwhelm’d as mine?Of all the goddesses, did Jove prepareFor
Thetis only such a weight of care?I, only I, of all the watery raceBy force
subjected to a man’s embrace,Who, sinking now with age and sorrow, paysThe
mighty fine imposed on length of days.Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero
came,The bravest sure that ever bore the name;Like some fair plant beneath my
careful handHe grew, he flourish’d, and adorn’d the land!To Troy I sent him! but
his native shoreNever, ah never, shall receive him more;(Even while he lives, he
wastes with secret woe;)Nor I, a goddess, can retard the blow!Robb’d of the
prize the Grecian suffrage gave,The king of nations forced his royal slave:For
this he grieved; and, till the Greeks oppress’dRequired his arm, he sorrow’d
unredress’d.Large gifts they promise, and their elders send;In vain—he arms not,
but permits his friendHis arms, his steeds, his forces to employ:He marches,
combats, almost conquers Troy:Then slain by Phœbus (Hector had the name)At once
resigns his armour, life, and fame.But thou, in pity, by my prayer be won:Grace
with immortal arms this short-lived son,And to the field in martial pomp
restore,To shine with glory, till he shines no more!”To her the artist-god: “Thy
griefs resign,Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine.O could I hide him from the
Fates, as well,Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel,As I shall forge most
envied arms, the gazeOf wondering ages, and the world’s amaze!”Thus having said,
the father of the firesTo the black labours of his forge retires.Soon as he bade
them blow, the bellows turn’dTheir iron mouths; and where the furnace
burn’d,Resounding breathed: at once the blast expires,And twenty forges catch at
once the fires;Just as the god directs, now loud, now low,They raise a tempest,
or they gently blow;In hissing flames huge silver bars are roll’d,And stubborn
brass, and tin, and solid gold;Before, deep fix’d, the eternal anvils stand;The
ponderous hammer loads his better hand,His left with tongs turns the vex’d metal
round,And thick, strong strokes, the doubling vaults rebound.Then first he
form’d the immense and solid shield;Rich various artifice emblazed the field;Its
utmost verge a threefold circle bound;[253]A silver chain suspends the massy
round;Five ample plates the broad expanse compose,And godlike labours on the
surface rose.There shone the image of the master-mind:There earth, there heaven,
there ocean he design’d;The unwearied sun, the moon completely round;The starry
lights that heaven’s high convex crown’d;The Pleiads, Hyads, with the northern
team;And great Orion’s more refulgent beam;To which, around the axle of the
sky,The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye,Still shines exalted on the
ethereal plain,Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.Two cities radiant on
the shield appear,The image one of peace, and one of war.Here sacred pomp and
genial feast delight,And solemn dance, and hymeneal rite;Along the street the
new-made brides are led,With torches flaming, to the nuptial bed:The youthful
dancers in a circle boundTo the soft flute, and cithern’s silver sound:Through
the fair streets the matrons in a rowStand in their porches, and enjoy the
show.There in the forum swarm a numerous train;The subject of debate, a townsman
slain:One pleads the fine discharged, which one denied,And bade the public and
the laws decide:The witness is produced on either hand:For this, or that, the
partial people stand:The appointed heralds still the noisy bands,And form a
ring, with sceptres in their hands:On seats of stone, within the sacred
place,[254]The reverend elders nodded o’er the case;Alternate, each the
attesting sceptre took,And rising solemn, each his sentence spoke.Two golden
talents lay amidst, in sight,The prize of him who best adjudged the
right.Another part (a prospect differing far)[255]Glow’d with refulgent arms,
and horrid war.Two mighty hosts a leaguer’d town embrace,And one would pillage,
one would burn the place.Meantime the townsmen, arm’d with silent care,A secret
ambush on the foe prepare:Their wives, their children, and the watchful bandOf
trembling parents, on the turrets stand.They march; by Pallas and by Mars made
bold:Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold,And gold their armour:
these the squadron led,August, divine, superior by the head!A place for ambush
fit they found, and stood,Cover’d with shields, beside a silver flood.Two spies
at distance lurk, and watchful seemIf sheep or oxen seek the winding stream.Soon
the white flocks proceeded o’er the plains,And steers slow-moving, and two
shepherd swains;Behind them piping on their reeds they go,Nor fear an ambush,
nor suspect a foe.In arms the glittering squadron rising roundRush sudden; hills
of slaughter heap the ground;Whole flocks and herds lie bleeding on the
plains,And, all amidst them, dead, the shepherd swains!The bellowing oxen the
besiegers hear;They rise, take horse, approach, and meet the war,They fight,
they fall, beside the silver flood;The waving silver seem’d to blush with
blood.There Tumult, there Contention stood confess’d;One rear’d a dagger at a
captive’s breast;One held a living foe, that freshly bledWith new-made wounds;
another dragg’d a dead;Now here, now there, the carcases they tore:Fate stalk’d
amidst them, grim with human gore.And the whole war came out, and met the
eye;And each bold figure seem’d to live or die.A field deep furrow’d next the
god design’d,[256]The third time labour’d by the sweating hind;The shining
shares full many ploughmen guide,And turn their crooked yokes on every
side.Still as at either end they wheel around,The master meets them with his
goblet crown’d;The hearty draught rewards, renews their toil,Then back the
turning ploughshares cleave the soil:Behind, the rising earth in ridges
roll’d;And sable look’d, though form’d of molten gold.Another field rose high
with waving grain;With bended sickles stand the reaper train:Here stretched in
ranks the levell’d swarths are found,Sheaves heap’d on sheaves here thicken up
the ground.With sweeping stroke the mowers strow the lands;The gatherers follow,
and collect in bands;And last the children, in whose arms are borne(Too short to
gripe them) the brown sheaves of corn.The rustic monarch of the field
descries,With silent glee, the heaps around him rise.A ready banquet on the turf
is laid,Beneath an ample oak’s expanded shade.The victim ox the sturdy youth
prepare;The reaper’s due repast, the woman’s care.Next, ripe in yellow gold, a
vineyard shines,Bent with the ponderous harvest of its vines;A deeper dye the
dangling clusters show,And curl’d on silver props, in order glow:A darker metal
mix’d intrench’d the place;And pales of glittering tin the inclosure grace.To
this, one pathway gently winding leads,Where march a train with baskets on their
heads,(Fair maids and blooming youths,) that smiling bearThe purple product of
the autumnal year.To these a youth awakes the warbling strings,Whose tender lay
the fate of Linus sings;In measured dance behind him move the train,Tune soft
the voice, and answer to the strain.Here herds of oxen march, erect and
bold,Rear high their horns, and seem to low in gold,And speed to meadows on
whose sounding shoresA rapid torrent through the rushes roars:Four golden
herdsmen as their guardians stand,And nine sour dogs complete the rustic
band.Two lions rushing from the wood appear’d;And seized a bull, the master of
the herd:He roar’d: in vain the dogs, the men withstood;They tore his flesh, and
drank his sable blood.The dogs (oft cheer’d in vain) desert the prey,Dread the
grim terrors, and at distance bay.Next this, the eye the art of Vulcan leadsDeep
through fair forests, and a length of meads,And stalls, and folds, and scatter’d
cots between;And fleecy flocks, that whiten all the scene.A figured dance
succeeds; such once was seenIn lofty Gnossus for the Cretan queen,Form’d by
Daedalean art; a comely bandOf youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand.The
maids in soft simars of linen dress’d;The youths all graceful in the glossy
vest:Of those the locks with flowery wreath inroll’d;Of these the sides adorn’d
with swords of gold,That glittering gay, from silver belts depend.Now all at
once they rise, at once descend,With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique
ways,Confusedly regular, the moving maze:Now forth at once, too swift for sight,
they spring,And undistinguish’d blend the flying ring:So whirls a wheel, in
giddy circle toss’d,And, rapid as it runs, the single spokes are lost.The gazing
multitudes admire around:Two active tumblers in the centre bound;Now high, now
low, their pliant limbs they bend:And general songs the sprightly revel end.Thus
the broad shield complete the artist crown’dWith his last hand, and pour’d the
ocean round:In living silver seem’d the waves to roll,And beat the buckler’s
verge, and bound the whole.This done, whate’er a warrior’s use requiresHe
forged; the cuirass that outshone the fires,The greaves of ductile tin, the helm
impress’dWith various sculpture, and the golden crest.At Thetis’ feet the
finished labour lay:She, as a falcon cuts the aerial way,Swift from Olympus’
snowy summit flies,And bears the blazing present through the skies.[257]BOOK
XIX.ARGUMENT.THE RECONCILIATION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.Thetis brings to her
son the armour made by Vulcan. She preserves thebody of his friend from
corruption, and commands him to assemble thearmy, to declare his resentment at
an end. Agamemnon and Achilles aresolemnly reconciled: the speeches, presents,
and ceremonies on thatoccasion. Achilles is with great difficulty persuaded to
refrain fromthe battle till the troops have refreshed themselves by the advice
ofUlysses. The presents are conveyed to the tent of Achilles, whereBriseïs
laments over the body of Patroclus. The hero obstinatelyrefuses all repast, and
gives himself up to lamentations for hisfriend. Minerva descends to strengthen
him, by the order of Jupiter. Hearms for the fight: his appearance described. He
addresses himself tohis horses, and reproaches them with the death of Patroclus.
One ofthem is miraculously endued with voice, and inspired to prophesy hisfate:
but the hero, not astonished by that prodigy, rushes with fury tothe combat. The
thirtieth day. The scene is on the sea-shore.Soon as Aurora heaved her Orient
headAbove the waves, that blush’d with early red,(With new-born day to gladden
mortal sight,And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light,)The immortal arms
the goddess-mother bearsSwift to her son: her son she finds in tearsStretch’d
o’er Patroclus’ corse; while all the restTheir sovereign’s sorrows in their own
express’d.A ray divine her heavenly presence shed,And thus, his hand soft
touching, Thetis said:“Suppress, my son, this rage of grief, and knowIt was not
man, but heaven, that gave the blow;Behold what arms by Vulcan are bestow’d,Arms
worthy thee, or fit to grace a god.”Then drops the radiant burden on the
ground;Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around;Back shrink the
Myrmidons with dread surprise,And from the broad effulgence turn their
eyes.Unmoved the hero kindles at the show,And feels with rage divine his bosom
glow;From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire,And flash incessant like a
stream of fire:He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mindOn all the immortal
artist had design’d.“Goddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shineWith
matchless art, confess the hand divine.Now to the bloody battle let me bend:But
ah! the relics of my slaughter’d friend!In those wide wounds through which his
spirit fled,Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?”“That unavailing
care be laid aside,(The azure goddess to her son replied,)Whole years untouch’d,
uninjured shall remain,Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain.But go,
Achilles, as affairs require,Before the Grecian peers renounce thine ire:Then
uncontroll’d in boundless war engage,And heaven with strength supply the mighty
rage!”[Illustration: ] THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLESThen in the
nostrils of the slain she pour’dNectareous drops, and rich ambrosia shower’dO’er
all the corse. The flies forbid their prey,Untouch’d it rests, and sacred from
decay.Achilles to the strand obedient went:The shores resounded with the voice
he sent.The heroes heard, and all the naval trainThat tend the ships, or guide
them o’er the main,Alarm’d, transported, at the well-known sound,Frequent and
full, the great assembly crown’d;Studious to see the terror of the plain,Long
lost to battle, shine in arms again.Tydides and Ulysses first appear,Lame with
their wounds, and leaning on the spear;These on the sacred seats of council
placed,The king of men, Atrides, came the last:He too sore wounded by Agenor’s
son.Achilles (rising in the midst) begun:“O monarch! better far had been the
fateOf thee, of me, of all the Grecian state,If (ere the day when by mad passion
sway’d,Rash we contended for the black-eyed maid)Preventing Dian had despatch’d
her dart,And shot the shining mischief to the heart!Then many a hero had not
press’d the shore,Nor Troy’s glad fields been fatten’d with our gore.Long, long
shall Greece the woes we caused bewail,And sad posterity repeat the tale.But
this, no more the subject of debate,Is past, forgotten, and resign’d to fate.Why
should, alas, a mortal man, as I,Burn with a fury that can never die?Here then
my anger ends: let war succeed,And even as Greece has bled, let Ilion bleed.Now
call the hosts, and try if in our sightTroy yet shall dare to camp a second
night!I deem, their mightiest, when this arm he knows,Shall ’scape with
transport, and with joy repose.”He said: his finish’d wrath with loud acclaimThe
Greeks accept, and shout Pelides’ name.When thus, not rising from his lofty
throne,In state unmoved, the king of men begun:“Hear me, ye sons of Greece! with
silence hear!And grant your monarch an impartial ear:Awhile your loud, untimely
joy suspend,And let your rash, injurious clamours end:Unruly murmurs, or
ill-timed applause,Wrong the best speaker, and the justest cause.Nor charge on
me, ye Greeks, the dire debate:Know, angry Jove, and all-compelling Fate,With
fell Erinnys, urged my wrath that dayWhen from Achilles’ arms I forced the
prey.What then could I against the will of heaven?Not by myself, but vengeful
Ate driven;She, Jove’s dread daughter, fated to infestThe race of mortals,
enter’d in my breast.Not on the ground that haughty fury treads,But prints her
lofty footsteps on the headsOf mighty men; inflicting as she goesLong-festering
wounds, inextricable woes!Of old, she stalk’d amid the bright abodes;And Jove
himself, the sire of men and gods,The world’s great ruler, felt her venom’d
dart;Deceived by Juno’s wiles, and female art:For when Alcmena’s nine long
months were run,And Jove expected his immortal son,To gods and goddesses the
unruly joyHe show’d, and vaunted of his matchless boy:‘From us, (he said) this
day an infant springs,Fated to rule, and born a king of kings.’Saturnia ask’d an
oath, to vouch the truth,And fix dominion on the favour’d youth.The Thunderer,
unsuspicious of the fraud,Pronounced those solemn words that bind a god.The
joyful goddess, from Olympus’ height,Swift to Achaian Argos bent her
flight:Scarce seven moons gone, lay Sthenelus’s wife;She push’d her lingering
infant into life:Her charms Alcmena’s coming labours stay,And stop the babe,
just issuing to the day.Then bids Saturnius bear his oath in mind;‘A youth (said
she) of Jove’s immortal kindIs this day born: from Sthenelus he springs,And
claims thy promise to be king of kings.’Grief seized the Thunderer, by his oath
engaged;Stung to the soul, he sorrow’d, and he raged.From his ambrosial head,
where perch’d she sate,He snatch’d the fury-goddess of debate,The dread, the
irrevocable oath he swore,The immortal seats should ne’er behold her more;And
whirl’d her headlong down, for ever drivenFrom bright Olympus and the starry
heaven:Thence on the nether world the fury fell;Ordain’d with man’s contentious
race to dwell.Full oft the god his son’s hard toils bemoan’d,Cursed the dire
fury, and in secret groan’d.[258]Even thus, like Jove himself, was I
misled,While raging Hector heap’d our camps with dead.What can the errors of my
rage atone?My martial troops, my treasures are thy own:This instant from the
navy shall be sentWhate’er Ulysses promised at thy tent:But thou! appeased,
propitious to our prayer,Resume thy arms, and shine again in war.”“O king of
nations! whose superior sway(Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey!To keep or
send the presents, be thy care;To us, ’tis equal: all we ask is war.While yet we
talk, or but an instant shunThe fight, our glorious work remains undone.Let
every Greek, who sees my spear confoundThe Trojan ranks, and deal destruction
round,With emulation, what I act survey,And learn from thence the business of
the day.”The son of Peleus thus; and thus repliesThe great in councils, Ithacus
the wise:“Though, godlike, thou art by no toils oppress’d,At least our armies
claim repast and rest:Long and laborious must the combat be,When by the gods
inspired, and led by thee.Strength is derived from spirits and from blood,And
those augment by generous wine and food:What boastful son of war, without that
stay,Can last a hero through a single day?Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out
his strength,Mere unsupported man must yield at length;Shrunk with dry famine,
and with toils declined,The drooping body will desert the mind:But built anew
with strength-conferring fare,With limbs and soul untamed, he tires a
war.Dismiss the people, then, and give command,With strong repast to hearten
every band;But let the presents to Achilles made,In full assembly of all Greece
be laid.The king of men shall rise in public sight,And solemn swear (observant
of the rite)That, spotless, as she came, the maid removes,Pure from his arms,
and guiltless of his loves.That done, a sumptuous banquet shall be made,And the
full price of injured honour paid.Stretch not henceforth, O prince! thy
sovereign mightBeyond the bounds of reason and of right;’Tis the chief praise
that e’er to kings belong’d,To right with justice whom with power they
wrong’d.”To him the monarch: “Just is thy decree,Thy words give joy, and wisdom
breathes in thee.Each due atonement gladly I prepare;And heaven regard me as I
justly swear!Here then awhile let Greece assembled stay,Nor great Achilles
grudge this short delay.Till from the fleet our presents be convey’d,And Jove
attesting, the firm compact made.A train of noble youths the charge shall
bear;These to select, Ulysses, be thy care:In order rank’d let all our gifts
appear,And the fair train of captives close the rear:Talthybius shall the victim
boar convey,Sacred to Jove, and yon bright orb of day.”“For this (the stern
Æacides replies)Some less important season may suffice,When the stern fury of
the war is o’er,And wrath, extinguish’d, burns my breast no more.By Hector
slain, their faces to the sky,All grim with gaping wounds, our heroes lie:Those
call to war! and might my voice incite,Now, now, this instant, shall commence
the fight:Then, when the day’s complete, let generous bowls,And copious
banquets, glad your weary souls.Let not my palate know the taste of food,Till my
insatiate rage be cloy’d with blood:Pale lies my friend, with wounds disfigured
o’er,And his cold feet are pointed to the door.Revenge is all my soul! no meaner
care,Interest, or thought, has room to harbour there;Destruction be my feast,
and mortal wounds,And scenes of blood, and agonizing sounds.”“O first of Greeks,
(Ulysses thus rejoin’d,)The best and bravest of the warrior kind!Thy praise it
is in dreadful camps to shine,But old experience and calm wisdom mine.Then hear
my counsel, and to reason yield,The bravest soon are satiate of the field;Though
vast the heaps that strow the crimson plain,The bloody harvest brings but little
gain:The scale of conquest ever wavering lies,Great Jove but turns it, and the
victor dies!The great, the bold, by thousands daily fall,And endless were the
grief, to weep for all.Eternal sorrows what avails to shed?Greece honours not
with solemn fasts the dead:Enough, when death demands the brave, to payThe
tribute of a melancholy day.One chief with patience to the grave resign’d,Our
care devolves on others left behind.Let generous food supplies of strength
produce,Let rising spirits flow from sprightly juice,Let their warm heads with
scenes of battle glow,And pour new furies on the feebler foe.Yet a short
interval, and none shall dareExpect a second summons to the war;Who waits for
that, the dire effects shall find,If trembling in the ships he lags
behind.Embodied, to the battle let us bend,And all at once on haughty Troy
descend.”And now the delegates Ulysses sent,To bear the presents from the royal
tent:The sons of Nestor, Phyleus’ valiant heir,Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of
war,With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain,And Melanippus, form’d the chosen
train.Swift as the word was given, the youths obey’d:Twice ten bright vases in
the midst they laid;A row of six fair tripods then succeeds;And twice the number
of high-bounding steeds:Seven captives next a lovely line compose;The eighth
Briseïs, like the blooming rose,Closed the bright band: great Ithacus,
before,First of the train, the golden talents bore:The rest in public view the
chiefs dispose,A splendid scene! then Agamemnon rose:The boar Talthybius held:
the Grecian lordDrew the broad cutlass sheath’d beside his sword:The stubborn
bristles from the victim’s browHe crops, and offering meditates his vow.His
hands uplifted to the attesting skies,On heaven’s broad marble roof were fixed
his eyes.The solemn words a deep attention draw,And Greece around sat thrill’d
with sacred awe.“Witness thou first! thou greatest power above,All-good,
all-wise, and all-surveying Jove!And mother-earth, and heaven’s revolving
light,And ye, fell furies of the realms of night,Who rule the dead, and horrid
woes prepareFor perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!The black-eyed maid
inviolate removes,Pure and unconscious of my manly loves.If this be false,
heaven all its vengeance shed,And levell’d thunder strike my guilty head!”With
that, his weapon deep inflicts the wound;The bleeding savage tumbles to the
ground;The sacred herald rolls the victim slain(A feast for fish) into the
foaming main.Then thus Achilles: “Hear, ye Greeks! and knowWhate’er we feel,
’tis Jove inflicts the woe;Not else Atrides could our rage inflame,Nor from my
arms, unwilling, force the dame.’Twas Jove’s high will alone, o’erruling
all,That doom’d our strife, and doom’d the Greeks to fall.Go then, ye chiefs!
indulge the genial rite;Achilles waits ye, and expects the fight.”The speedy
council at his word adjourn’d:To their black vessels all the Greeks
return’d.Achilles sought his tent. His train beforeMarch’d onward, bending with
the gifts they bore.Those in the tents the squires industrious spread:The
foaming coursers to the stalls they led;To their new seats the female captives
move.Briseïs, radiant as the queen of love,Slow as she pass’d, beheld with sad
surveyWhere, gash’d with cruel wounds, Patroclus lay.Prone on the body fell the
heavenly fair,Beat her sad breast, and tore her golden hair;All beautiful in
grief, her humid eyesShining with tears she lifts, and thus she cries:“Ah, youth
for ever dear, for ever kind,Once tender friend of my distracted mind!I left
thee fresh in life, in beauty gay;Now find thee cold, inanimated clay!What woes
my wretched race of life attend!Sorrows on sorrows, never doom’d to end!The
first loved consort of my virgin bedBefore these eyes in fatal battle bled:My
three brave brothers in one mournful dayAll trod the dark, irremeable way:Thy
friendly hand uprear’d me from the plain,And dried my sorrows for a husband
slain;Achilles’ care you promised I should prove,The first, the dearest partner
of his love;That rites divine should ratify the band,And make me empress in his
native land.Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow,For thee, that ever
felt another’s woe!”Her sister captives echoed groan for groan,Nor mourn’d
Patroclus’ fortunes, but their own.The leaders press’d the chief on every
side;Unmoved he heard them, and with sighs denied.“If yet Achilles have a
friend, whose careIs bent to please him, this request forbear;Till yonder sun
descend, ah, let me payTo grief and anguish one abstemious day.”He spoke, and
from the warriors turn’d his face:Yet still the brother-kings of Atreus’
race.Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage,And Phœnix, strive to calm his grief and
rage:His rage they calm not, nor his grief control;He groans, he raves, he
sorrows from his soul.“Thou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents)Once spread
the inviting banquet in our tents:Thy sweet society, thy winning care,Once
stay’d Achilles, rushing to the war.But now, alas! to death’s cold arms
resign’d,What banquet but revenge can glad my mind?What greater sorrow could
afflict my breast,What more if hoary Peleus were deceased?Who now, perhaps, in
Phthia dreads to hearHis son’s sad fate, and drops a tender tear.What more,
should Neoptolemus the brave,My only offspring, sink into the grave?If yet that
offspring lives; (I distant far,Of all neglectful, wage a hateful war.)I could
not this, this cruel stroke attend;Fate claim’d Achilles, but might spare his
friend.I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rearMy tender orphan with a parent’s
care,From Scyros’ isle conduct him o’er the main,And glad his eyes with his
paternal reign,The lofty palace, and the large domain.For Peleus breathes no
more the vital air;Or drags a wretched life of age and care,But till the news of
my sad fate invadesHis hastening soul, and sinks him to the shades.”Sighing he
said: his grief the heroes join’d,Each stole a tear for what he left
behind.Their mingled grief the sire of heaven survey’d,And thus with pity to his
blue-eyed maid:“Is then Achilles now no more thy care,And dost thou thus desert
the great in war?Lo, where yon sails their canvas wings extend,All comfortless
he sits, and wails his friend:Ere thirst and want his forces have
oppress’d,Haste and infuse ambrosia in his breast.”He spoke; and sudden, at the
word of Jove,Shot the descending goddess from above.So swift through ether the
shrill harpy springs,The wide air floating to her ample wings,To great Achilles
she her flight address’d,And pour’d divine ambrosia in his breast,[259]With
nectar sweet, (refection of the gods!)Then, swift ascending, sought the bright
abodes.Now issued from the ships the warrior-train,And like a deluge pour’d upon
the plain.As when the piercing blasts of Boreas blow,And scatter o’er the fields
the driving snow;From dusky clouds the fleecy winter flies,Whose dazzling lustre
whitens all the skies:So helms succeeding helms, so shields from shields,Catch
the quick beams, and brighten all the fields;Broad glittering breastplates,
spears with pointed rays,Mix in one stream, reflecting blaze on blaze;Thick
beats the centre as the coursers bound;With splendour flame the skies, and laugh
the fields around,Full in the midst, high-towering o’er the rest,His limbs in
arms divine Achilles dress’d;Arms which the father of the fire bestow’d,Forged
on the eternal anvils of the god.Grief and revenge his furious heart inspire,His
glowing eyeballs roll with living fire;He grinds his teeth, and furious with
delayO’erlooks the embattled host, and hopes the bloody day.The silver cuishes
first his thighs infold;Then o’er his breast was braced the hollow gold;The
brazen sword a various baldric tied,That, starr’d with gems, hung glittering at
his side;And, like the moon, the broad refulgent shieldBlazed with long rays,
and gleam’d athwart the field.So to night-wandering sailors, pale with
fears,Wide o’er the watery waste, a light appears,Which on the far-seen mountain
blazing high,Streams from some lonely watch-tower to the sky:With mournful eyes
they gaze, and gaze again;Loud howls the storm, and drives them o’er the
main.Next, his high head the helmet graced; behindThe sweepy crest hung floating
in the wind:Like the red star, that from his flaming hairShakes down diseases,
pestilence, and war;So stream’d the golden honours from his head,Trembled the
sparkling plumes, and the loose glories shed.The chief beholds himself with
wondering eyes;His arms he poises, and his motions tries;Buoy’d by some inward
force, he seems to swim,And feels a pinion lifting every limb.And now he shakes
his great paternal spear,Ponderous and huge, which not a Greek could rear,From
Pelion’s cloudy top an ash entireOld Chiron fell’d, and shaped it for his sire;A
spear which stern Achilles only wields,The death of heroes, and the dread of
fields.Automedon and Alcimus prepareThe immortal coursers, and the radiant
car;(The silver traces sweeping at their side;)Their fiery mouths resplendent
bridles tied;The ivory-studded reins, return’d behind,Waved o’er their backs,
and to the chariot join’d.The charioteer then whirl’d the lash around,And swift
ascended at one active bound.All bright in heavenly arms, above his
squireAchilles mounts, and sets the field on fire;Not brighter Phœbus in the
ethereal wayFlames from his chariot, and restores the day.High o’er the host,
all terrible he stands,And thunders to his steeds these dread commands:“Xanthus
and Balius! of Podarges’ strain,(Unless ye boast that heavenly race in vain,)Be
swift, be mindful of the load ye bear,And learn to make your master more your
care:Through falling squadrons bear my slaughtering sword,Nor, as ye left
Patroclus, leave your lord.”The generous Xanthus, as the words he said,Seem’d
sensible of woe, and droop’d his head:Trembling he stood before the golden
wain,And bow’d to dust the honours of his mane.When, strange to tell! (so Juno
will’d) he brokeEternal silence, and portentous spoke.“Achilles! yes! this day
at least we bearThy rage in safety through the files of war:But come it will,
the fatal time must come,Not ours the fault, but God decrees thy doom.Not
through our crime, or slowness in the course,Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly
force;The bright far-shooting god who gilds the day(Confess’d we saw him) tore
his arms away.No—could our swiftness o’er the winds prevail,Or beat the pinions
of the western gale,All were in vain—the Fates thy death demand,Due to a mortal
and immortal hand.”Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied,His fateful voice.
The intrepid chief repliedWith unabated rage—“So let it be!Portents and
prodigies are lost on me.I know my fate: to die, to see no moreMy much-loved
parents, and my native shore—Enough—when heaven ordains, I sink in night:Now
perish Troy!” He said, and rush’d to fight.[Illustration: ] HERCULESBOOK
XX.ARGUMENT.THE BATTLE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHILLES.Jupiter, upon
Achilles’ return to the battle, calls a council of thegods, and permits them to
assist either party. The terrors of thecombat described, when the deities are
engaged. Apollo encourages Æneasto meet Achilles. After a long conversation,
these two heroesencounter; but Æneas is preserved by the assistance of
Neptune.Achilles falls upon the rest of the Trojans, and is upon the point
ofkilling Hector, but Apollo conveys him away in a cloud. Achillespursues the
Trojans with a great slaughter. The same day continues. The scene is in the
field before Troy.Thus round Pelides breathing war and bloodGreece, sheathed in
arms, beside her vessels stood;While near impending from a neighbouring
height,Troy’s black battalions wait the shock of fight.Then Jove to Themis gives
command, to callThe gods to council in the starry hall:Swift o’er Olympus’
hundred hills she flies,And summons all the senate of the skies.These shining
on, in long procession comeTo Jove’s eternal adamantine dome.Not one was absent,
not a rural powerThat haunts the verdant gloom, or rosy bower;Each fair-hair’d
dryad of the shady wood,Each azure sister of the silver flood;All but old Ocean,
hoary sire! who keepsHis ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps.On marble
thrones, with lucid columns crown’d,(The work of Vulcan,) sat the powers
around.Even he whose trident sways the watery reignHeard the loud summons, and
forsook the main,Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes,And question’d thus
the sire of men and gods:“What moves the god who heaven and earth commands,And
grasps the thunder in his awful hands,Thus to convene the whole ethereal
state?Is Greece and Troy the subject in debate?Already met, the louring hosts
appear,And death stands ardent on the edge of war.”“’Tis true (the
cloud-compelling power replies)This day we call the council of the skiesIn care
of human race; even Jove’s own eyeSees with regret unhappy mortals die.Far on
Olympus’ top in secret stateOurself will sit, and see the hand of fateWork out
our will. Celestial powers! descend,And as your minds direct, your succour
lendTo either host. Troy soon must lie o’erthrown,If uncontroll’d Achilles
fights alone:Their troops but lately durst not meet his eyes;What can they now,
if in his rage he rise?Assist them, gods! or Ilion’s sacred wallMay fall this
day, though fate forbids the fall.”He said, and fired their heavenly breasts
with rage.On adverse parts the warring gods engage:Heaven’s awful queen; and he
whose azure roundGirds the vast globe; the maid in arms renown’d;Hermes, of
profitable arts the sire;And Vulcan, the black sovereign of the fire:These to
the fleet repair with instant flight;The vessels tremble as the gods alight.In
aid of Troy, Latona, Phœbus came,Mars fiery-helm’d, the laughter-loving
dame,Xanthus, whose streams in golden currents flow,And the chaste huntress of
the silver bow.Ere yet the gods their various aid employ,Each Argive bosom
swell’d with manly joy,While great Achilles (terror of the plain),Long lost to
battle, shone in arms again.Dreadful he stood in front of all his host;Pale Troy
beheld, and seem’d already lost;Her bravest heroes pant with inward fear,And
trembling see another god of war.But when the powers descending swell’d the
fight,Then tumult rose: fierce rage and pale affrightVaried each face: then
Discord sounds alarms,Earth echoes, and the nations rush to arms.Now through the
trembling shores Minerva calls,And now she thunders from the Grecian walls.Mars
hovering o’er his Troy, his terror shroudsIn gloomy tempests, and a night of
clouds:Now through each Trojan heart he fury poursWith voice divine, from
Ilion’s topmost towers:Now shouts to Simois, from her beauteous hill;The
mountain shook, the rapid stream stood still.Above, the sire of gods his thunder
rolls,And peals on peals redoubled rend the poles.Beneath, stern Neptune shakes
the solid ground;The forests wave, the mountains nod around;Through all their
summits tremble Ida’s woods,And from their sources boil her hundred
floods.Troy’s turrets totter on the rocking plain,And the toss’d navies beat the
heaving main.Deep in the dismal regions of the dead,[260]The infernal monarch
rear’d his horrid head,Leap’d from his throne, lest Neptune’s arm should layHis
dark dominions open to the day,And pour in light on Pluto’s drear
abodes,Abhorr’d by men, and dreadful even to gods.[261][Illustration: ] THE GODS
DESCENDING TO BATTLESuch war the immortals wage; such horrors rendThe world’s
vast concave, when the gods contend.First silver-shafted Phœbus took the
plainAgainst blue Neptune, monarch of the main.The god of arms his giant bulk
display’d,Opposed to Pallas, war’s triumphant maid.Against Latona march’d the
son of May.The quiver’d Dian, sister of the day,(Her golden arrows sounding at
her side,)Saturnia, majesty of heaven, defied.With fiery Vulcan last in battle
standsThe sacred flood that rolls on golden sands;Xanthus his name with those of
heavenly birth,But called Scamander by the sons of earth.While thus the gods in
various league engage,Achilles glow’d with more than mortal rage:Hector he
sought; in search of Hector turn’dHis eyes around, for Hector only burn’d;And
burst like lightning through the ranks, and vow’dTo glut the god of battles with
his blood.Æneas was the first who dared to stay;Apollo wedged him in the
warrior’s way,But swell’d his bosom with undaunted might,Half-forced and
half-persuaded to the fight.Like young Lycaon, of the royal line,In voice and
aspect, seem’d the power divine;And bade the chief reflect, how late with
scornIn distant threats he braved the goddess-born.Then thus the hero of
Anchises’ strain:“To meet Pelides you persuade in vain:Already have I met, nor
void of fearObserved the fury of his flying spear;From Ida’s woods he chased us
to the field,Our force he scattered, and our herds he kill’d;Lyrnessus, Pedasus
in ashes lay;But (Jove assisting) I survived the day:Else had I sunk oppress’d
in fatal fightBy fierce Achilles and Minerva’s might.Where’er he moved, the
goddess shone before,And bathed his brazen lance in hostile gore.What mortal man
Achilles can sustain?The immortals guard him through the dreadful plain,And
suffer not his dart to fall in vain.Were God my aid, this arm should check his
power,Though strong in battle as a brazen tower.”To whom the son of Jove: “That
god implore,And be what great Achilles was before.From heavenly Venus thou
deriv’st thy strain,And he but from a sister of the main;An aged sea-god father
of his line;But Jove himself the sacred source of thine.Then lift thy weapon for
a noble blow,Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal foe.”This said, and spirit
breathed into his breast,Through the thick troops the embolden’d hero
press’d:His venturous act the white-arm’d queen survey’d,And thus, assembling
all the powers, she said:“Behold an action, gods! that claims your care,Lo great
Æneas rushing to the war!Against Pelides he directs his course,Phœbus impels,
and Phœbus gives him force.Restrain his bold career; at least, to attendOur
favour’d hero, let some power descend.To guard his life, and add to his
renown,We, the great armament of heaven, came down.Hereafter let him fall, as
Fates design,That spun so short his life’s illustrious line:[262]But lest some
adverse god now cross his way,Give him to know what powers assist this day:For
how shall mortal stand the dire alarms,When heaven’s refulgent host appear in
arms?”[263]Thus she; and thus the god whose force can makeThe solid globe’s
eternal basis shake:“Against the might of man, so feeble known,Why should
celestial powers exert their own?Suffice from yonder mount to view the scene,And
leave to war the fates of mortal men.But if the armipotent, or god of
light,Obstruct Achilles, or commence the fight,Thence on the gods of Troy we
swift descend:Full soon, I doubt not, shall the conflict end;And these, in ruin
and confusion hurl’d,Yield to our conquering arms the lower world.”Thus having
said, the tyrant of the sea,Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the way.Advanced
upon the field there stood a moundOf earth congested, wall’d, and trench’d
around;In elder times to guard Alcides made,(The work of Trojans, with Minerva’s
aid,)What time a vengeful monster of the mainSwept the wide shore, and drove him
to the plain.Here Neptune and the gods of Greece repair,With clouds encompass’d,
and a veil of air:The adverse powers, around Apollo laid,Crown the fair hills
that silver Simois shade.In circle close each heavenly party sat,Intent to form
the future scheme of fate;But mix not yet in fight, though Jove on highGives the
loud signal, and the heavens reply.Meanwhile the rushing armies hide the
ground;The trampled centre yields a hollow sound:Steeds cased in mail, and
chiefs in armour bright,The gleaming champaign glows with brazen light.Amid both
hosts (a dreadful space) appear,There great Achilles; bold Æneas, here.With
towering strides Æneas first advanced;The nodding plumage on his helmet
danced:Spread o’er his breast the fencing shield he bore,And, so he moved, his
javelin flamed before.Not so Pelides; furious to engage,He rush’d impetuous.
Such the lion’s rage,Who viewing first his foes with scornful eyes,Though all in
arms the peopled city rise,Stalks careless on, with unregarding pride;Till at
the length, by some brave youth defied,To his bold spear the savage turns
alone,He murmurs fury with a hollow groan;He grins, he foams, he rolls his eyes
around,Lash’d by his tail his heaving sides resound;He calls up all his rage; he
grinds his teeth,Resolved on vengeance, or resolved on death.So fierce Achilles
on Æneas flies;So stands Æneas, and his force defies.Ere yet the stern encounter
join’d, begunThe seed of Thetis thus to Venus’ son:“Why comes Æneas through the
ranks so far?Seeks he to meet Achilles’ arm in war,In hope the realms of Priam
to enjoy,And prove his merits to the throne of Troy?Grant that beneath thy lance
Achilles dies,The partial monarch may refuse the prize;Sons he has many; those
thy pride may quell:And ’tis his fault to love those sons too well,Or, in reward
of thy victorious hand,Has Troy proposed some spacious tract of land,An ample
forest, or a fair domain,Of hills for vines, and arable for grain?Even this,
perhaps, will hardly prove thy lot.But can Achilles be so soon forgot?Once (as I
think) you saw this brandish’d spear,And then the great Æneas seem’d to
fear:With hearty haste from Ida’s mount he fled,Nor, till he reach’d Lyrnessus,
turn’d his head.Her lofty walls not long our progress stay’d;Those, Pallas,
Jove, and we, in ruins laid:In Grecian chains her captive race were cast;’Tis
true, the great Æneas fled too fast.Defrauded of my conquest once before,What
then I lost, the gods this day restore.Go; while thou may’st, avoid the
threaten’d fate;Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late.”To this Anchises’
son: “Such words employTo one that fears thee, some unwarlike boy;Such we
disdain; the best may be defiedWith mean reproaches, and unmanly pride;Unworthy
the high race from which we cameProclaim’d so loudly by the voice of fame:Each
from illustrious fathers draws his line;Each goddess-born; half human, half
divine.Thetis’ this day, or Venus’ offspring dies,And tears shall trickle from
celestial eyes:For when two heroes, thus derived, contend,’Tis not in words the
glorious strife can end.If yet thou further seek to learn my birth(A tale
resounded through the spacious earth)Hear how the glorious origin we proveFrom
ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove:Dardania’s walls he raised; for Ilion,
then,(The city since of many-languaged men,)Was not. The natives were content to
tillThe shady foot of Ida’s fountful hill.[264]From Dardanus great Erichthonius
springs,The richest, once, of Asia’s wealthy kings;Three thousand mares his
spacious pastures bred,Three thousand foals beside their mothers fed.Boreas,
enamour’d of the sprightly train,Conceal’d his godhead in a flowing mane,With
voice dissembled to his loves he neigh’d,And coursed the dappled beauties o’er
the mead:Hence sprung twelve others of unrivall’d kind,Swift as their mother
mares, and father wind.These lightly skimming, when they swept the plain,Nor
plied the grass, nor bent the tender grain;And when along the level seas they
flew,[265]Scarce on the surface curl’d the briny dew.Such Erichthonius was: from
him there cameThe sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan name.Three sons renown’d
adorn’d his nuptial bed,Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed:The matchless Ganymed,
divinely fair,Whom heaven, enamour’d, snatch’d to upper air,To bear the cup of
Jove (ethereal guest,The grace and glory of the ambrosial feast).The two
remaining sons the line divide:First rose Laomedon from Ilus’ side;From him
Tithonus, now in cares grown old,And Priam, bless’d with Hector, brave and
bold;Clytius and Lampus, ever-honour’d pair;And Hicetaon, thunderbolt of
war.From great Assaracus sprang Capys, heBegat Anchises, and Anchises me.Such is
our race: ’tis fortune gives us birth,But Jove alone endues the soul with
worth:He, source of power and might! with boundless sway,All human courage
gives, or takes away.Long in the field of words we may contend,Reproach is
infinite, and knows no end,Arm’d or with truth or falsehood, right or wrong;So
voluble a weapon is the tongue;Wounded, we wound; and neither side can fail,For
every man has equal strength to rail:Women alone, when in the streets they
jar,Perhaps excel us in this wordy war;Like us they stand, encompass’d with the
crowd,And vent their anger impotent and loud.Cease then—Our business in the
field of fightIs not to question, but to prove our might.To all those insults
thou hast offer’d here,Receive this answer: ’tis my flying spear.”He spoke. With
all his force the javelin flung,Fix’d deep, and loudly in the buckler rung.Far
on his outstretch’d arm, Pelides held(To meet the thundering lance) his dreadful
shield,That trembled as it stuck; nor void of fearSaw, ere it fell, the
immeasurable spear.His fears were vain; impenetrable charmsSecured the temper of
the ethereal arms.Through two strong plates the point its passage held,But
stopp’d, and rested, by the third repell’d.Five plates of various metal, various
mould,Composed the shield; of brass each outward fold,Of tin each inward, and
the middle gold:There stuck the lance. Then rising ere he threw,The forceful
spear of great Achilles flew,And pierced the Dardan shield’s extremest
bound,Where the shrill brass return’d a sharper sound:Through the thin verge the
Pelean weapon glides,And the slight covering of expanded hides.Æneas his
contracted body bends,And o’er him high the riven targe extends,Sees, through
its parting plates, the upper air,And at his back perceives the quivering
spear:A fate so near him, chills his soul with fright;And swims before his eyes
the many-colour’d light.Achilles, rushing in with dreadful cries,Draws his broad
blade, and at Æneas flies:Æneas rousing as the foe came on,With force collected,
heaves a mighty stone:A mass enormous! which in modern daysNo two of earth’s
degenerate sons could raise.But ocean’s god, whose earthquakes rock the
groundSaw the distress, and moved the powers around:“Lo! on the brink of fate
Æneas stands,An instant victim to Achilles’ hands;By Phœbus urged; but Phœbus
has bestow’dHis aid in vain: the man o’erpowers the god.And can ye see this
righteous chief atoneWith guiltless blood for vices not his own?To all the gods
his constant vows were paid;Sure, though he wars for Troy, he claims our
aid.Fate wills not this; nor thus can Jove resignThe future father of the Dardan
line:[266]The first great ancestor obtain’d his grace,And still his love
descends on all the race:For Priam now, and Priam’s faithless kind,At length are
odious to the all-seeing mind;On great Æneas shall devolve the reign,And sons
succeeding sons the lasting line sustain.”The great earth-shaker thus: to whom
repliesThe imperial goddess with the radiant eyes:“Good as he is, to immolate or
spareThe Dardan prince, O Neptune! be thy care;Pallas and I, by all that gods
can bind,Have sworn destruction to the Trojan kind;Not even an instant to
protract their fate,Or save one member of the sinking state;Till her last flame
be quench’d with her last gore,And even her crumbling ruins are no more.”The
king of ocean to the fight descends,Through all the whistling darts his course
he bends,Swift interposed between the warrior flies,And casts thick darkness
o’er Achilles’ eyes.[267]From great Æneas’ shield the spear he drew,And at his
master’s feet the weapon threw.That done, with force divine he snatch’d on
highThe Dardan prince, and bore him through the sky,Smooth-gliding without step,
above the headsOf warring heroes, and of bounding steeds:Till at the battle’s
utmost verge they light,Where the slow Caucans close the rear of fight.The
godhead there (his heavenly form confess’d)With words like these the panting
chief address’d:“What power, O prince! with force inferior far,Urged thee to
meet Achilles’ arm in war?Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy doom,Defrauding
fate of all thy fame to come.But when the day decreed (for come it must)Shall
lay this dreadful hero in the dust,Let then the furies of that arm be
known,Secure no Grecian force transcends thy own.”With that, he left him
wondering as he lay,Then from Achilles chased the mist away:Sudden, returning
with a stream of light,The scene of war came rushing on his sight.Then thus,
amazed; “What wonders strike my mind!My spear, that parted on the wings of
wind,Laid here before me! and the Dardan lord,That fell this instant, vanish’d
from my sword!I thought alone with mortals to contend,But powers celestial sure
this foe defend.Great as he is, our arms he scarce will try,Content for once,
with all his gods, to fly.Now then let others bleed.” This said, aloudHe vents
his fury and inflames the crowd:“O Greeks! (he cries, and every rank alarms)Join
battle, man to man, and arms to arms!’Tis not in me, though favour’d by the
sky,To mow whole troops, and make whole armies fly:No god can singly such a host
engage,Not Mars himself, nor great Minerva’s rage.But whatsoe’er Achilles can
inspire,Whate’er of active force, or acting fire;Whate’er this heart can prompt,
or hand obey;All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day.Through yon wide host
this arm shall scatter fear,And thin the squadrons with my single spear.”He
said: nor less elate with martial joy,The godlike Hector warm’d the troops of
Troy:“Trojans, to war! Think, Hector leads you on;Nor dread the vaunts of
Peleus’ haughty son.Deeds must decide our fate. E’en these with wordsInsult the
brave, who tremble at their swords:The weakest atheist-wretch all heaven
defies,But shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies.Nor from yon boaster
shall your chief retire,Not though his heart were steel, his hands were
fire;That fire, that steel, your Hector should withstand,And brave that vengeful
heart, that dreadful hand.”Thus (breathing rage through all) the hero said;A
wood of lances rises round his head,Clamours on clamours tempest all the
air,They join, they throng, they thicken to the war.But Phœbus warns him from
high heaven to shunThe single fight with Thetis’ godlike son;More safe to combat
in the mingled band,Nor tempt too near the terrors of his hand.He hears,
obedient to the god of light,And, plunged within the ranks, awaits the
fight.Then fierce Achilles, shouting to the skies,On Troy’s whole force with
boundless fury flies.First falls Iphytion, at his army’s head;Brave was the
chief, and brave the host he led;From great Otrynteus he derived his blood,His
mother was a Nais, of the flood;Beneath the shades of Tmolus, crown’d with
snow,From Hyde’s walls he ruled the lands below.Fierce as he springs, the sword
his head divides:The parted visage falls on equal sides:With loud-resounding
arms he strikes the plain;While thus Achilles glories o’er the slain:“Lie there,
Otryntides! the Trojan earthReceives thee dead, though Gygae boast thy
birth;Those beauteous fields where Hyllus’ waves are roll’d,And plenteous Hermus
swells with tides of gold,Are thine no more.”—The insulting hero said,And left
him sleeping in eternal shade.The rolling wheels of Greece the body tore,And
dash’d their axles with no vulgar gore.Demoleon next, Antenor’s offspring,
laidBreathless in dust, the price of rashness paid.The impatient steel with
full-descending swayForced through his brazen helm its furious way,Resistless
drove the batter’d skull before,And dash’d and mingled all the brains with
gore.This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fright,Deserts his chariot for a
swifter flight:The lance arrests him: an ignoble woundThe panting Trojan rivets
to the ground.He groans away his soul: not louder roars,At Neptune’s shrine on
Helicè’s high shores,The victim bull; the rocks re-bellow round,And ocean
listens to the grateful sound.Then fell on Polydore his vengeful rage,[268]The
youngest hope of Priam’s stooping age:(Whose feet for swiftness in the race
surpass’d:)Of all his sons, the dearest, and the last.To the forbidden field he
takes his flight,In the first folly of a youthful knight,To vaunt his swiftness
wheels around the plain,But vaunts not long, with all his swiftness slain:Struck
where the crossing belts unite behind,And golden rings the double back-plate
join’dForth through the navel burst the thrilling steel;And on his knees with
piercing shrieks he fell;The rushing entrails pour’d upon the groundHis hands
collect; and darkness wraps him round.When Hector view’d, all ghastly in his
gore,Thus sadly slain the unhappy Polydore,A cloud of sorrow overcast his
sight,His soul no longer brook’d the distant fight:Full in Achilles’ dreadful
front he came,And shook his javelin like a waving flame.The son of Peleus sees,
with joy possess’d,His heart high-bounding in his rising breast.“And, lo! the
man on whom black fates attend;The man, that slew Achilles, is his friend!No
more shall Hector’s and Pelides’ spearTurn from each other in the walks of
war.”—Then with revengeful eyes he scann’d him o’er:“Come, and receive thy
fate!” He spake no more.Hector, undaunted, thus: “Such words employTo one that
dreads thee, some unwarlike boy:Such we could give, defying and defied,Mean
intercourse of obloquy and pride!I know thy force to mine superior far;But
heaven alone confers success in war:Mean as I am, the gods may guide my dart,And
give it entrance in a braver heart.”Then parts the lance: but Pallas’ heavenly
breathFar from Achilles wafts the winged death:The bidden dart again to Hector
flies,And at the feet of its great master lies.Achilles closes with his hated
foe,His heart and eyes with flaming fury glow:But present to his aid, Apollo
shroudsThe favour’d hero in a veil of clouds.Thrice struck Pelides with
indignant heart,Thrice in impassive air he plunged the dart;The spear a fourth
time buried in the cloud.He foams with fury, and exclaims aloud:“Wretch! thou
hast ’scaped again; once more thy flightHas saved thee, and the partial god of
light.But long thou shalt not thy just fate withstand,If any power assist
Achilles’ hand.Fly then inglorious! but thy flight this dayWhole hecatombs of
Trojan ghosts shall pay.”With that, he gluts his rage on numbers slain:Then
Dryops tumbled to the ensanguined plain,Pierced through the neck: he left him
panting there,And stopp’d Demuchus, great Philetor’s heir.Gigantic chief! deep
gash’d the enormous blade,And for the soul an ample passage made.Laoganus and
Dardanus expire,The valiant sons of an unhappy sire;Both in one instant from the
chariot hurl’d,Sunk in one instant to the nether world:This difference only
their sad fates affordThat one the spear destroy’d, and one the sword.Nor less
unpitied, young Alastor bleeds;In vain his youth, in vain his beauty pleads;In
vain he begs thee, with a suppliant’s moan,To spare a form, an age so like thy
own!Unhappy boy! no prayer, no moving art,E’er bent that fierce, inexorable
heart!While yet he trembled at his knees, and cried,The ruthless falchion oped
his tender side;The panting liver pours a flood of goreThat drowns his bosom
till he pants no more.Through Mulius’ head then drove the impetuous spear:The
warrior falls, transfix’d from ear to ear.Thy life, Echeclus! next the sword
bereaves,Deep though the front the ponderous falchion cleaves;Warm’d in the
brain the smoking weapon lies,The purple death comes floating o’er his eyes.Then
brave Deucalion died: the dart was flungWhere the knit nerves the pliant elbow
strung;He dropp’d his arm, an unassisting weight,And stood all impotent,
expecting fate:Full on his neck the falling falchion sped,From his broad
shoulders hew’d his crested head:Forth from the bone the spinal marrow
flies,And, sunk in dust, the corpse extended lies.Rhigmas, whose race from
fruitful Thracia came,(The son of Pierus, an illustrious name,)Succeeds to fate:
the spear his belly rends;Prone from his car the thundering chief descends.The
squire, who saw expiring on the groundHis prostrate master, rein’d the steeds
around;His back, scarce turn’d, the Pelian javelin gored,And stretch’d the
servant o’er his dying lord.As when a flame the winding valley fills,And runs on
crackling shrubs between the hills;Then o’er the stubble up the mountain
flies,Fires the high woods, and blazes to the skies,This way and that, the
spreading torrent roars:So sweeps the hero through the wasted shores;Around him
wide, immense destruction poursAnd earth is deluged with the sanguine showers,As
with autumnal harvests cover’d o’er,And thick bestrewn, lies Ceres’ sacred
floor;When round and round, with never-wearied pain,The trampling steers beat
out the unnumber’d grain:So the fierce coursers, as the chariot rolls,Tread down
whole ranks, and crush out heroes’ souls,Dash’d from their hoofs while o’er the
dead they fly,Black, bloody drops the smoking chariot dye:The spiky wheels
through heaps of carnage tore;And thick the groaning axles dropp’d with
gore.High o’er the scene of death Achilles stood,All grim with dust, all
horrible in blood:Yet still insatiate, still with rage on flame;Such is the lust
of never-dying fame![Illustration: ] CENTAURBOOK XXI.ARGUMENT.THE BATTLE IN THE
RIVER SCAMANDER.[269]The Trojans fly before Achilles, some towards the town,
others to theriver Scamander: he falls upon the latter with great slaughter:
takestwelve captives alive, to sacrifice to the shade of Patroclus; andkills
Lycaon and Asteropeus. Scamander attacks him with all his waves:Neptune and
Pallas assist the hero: Simois joins Scamander: at lengthVulcan, by the
instigation of Juno, almost dries up the river. Thiscombat ended, the other gods
engage each other. Meanwhile Achillescontinues the slaughter, drives the rest
into Troy: Agenor only makes astand, and is conveyed away in a cloud by Apollo;
who (to deludeAchilles) takes upon him Agenor’s shape, and while he pursues him
inthat disguise, gives the Trojans an opportunity of retiring into theircity.
The same day continues. The scene is on the banks and in the stream of
Scamander.And now to Xanthus’ gliding stream they drove,Xanthus, immortal
progeny of Jove.The river here divides the flying train,Part to the town fly
diverse o’er the plain,Where late their troops triumphant bore the fight,Now
chased, and trembling in ignoble flight:(These with a gathered mist Saturnia
shrouds,And rolls behind the rout a heap of clouds:)Part plunge into the stream:
old Xanthus roars,The flashing billows beat the whiten’d shores:With cries
promiscuous all the banks resound,And here, and there, in eddies whirling
round,The flouncing steeds and shrieking warriors drown’d.As the scorch’d
locusts from their fields retire,While fast behind them runs the blaze of
fire;Driven from the land before the smoky cloud,The clustering legions rush
into the flood:So, plunged in Xanthus by Achilles’ force,Roars the resounding
surge with men and horse.His bloody lance the hero casts aside,(Which spreading
tamarisks on the margin hide,)Then, like a god, the rapid billows braves,Arm’d
with his sword, high brandish’d o’er the waves:Now down he plunges, now he
whirls it round,Deep groan’d the waters with the dying sound;Repeated wounds the
reddening river dyed,And the warm purple circled on the tide.Swift through the
foamy flood the Trojans fly,And close in rocks or winding caverns lie:So the
huge dolphin tempesting the main,In shoals before him fly the scaly
train,Confusedly heap’d they seek their inmost caves,Or pant and heave beneath
the floating waves.Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan bandTwelve chosen
youths he drags alive to land;With their rich belts their captive arms
restrains(Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains).These his attendants
to the ships convey’d,Sad victims destined to Patroclus’ shade;Then, as once
more he plunged amid the flood,The young Lycaon in his passage stood;The son of
Priam; whom the hero’s handBut late made captive in his father’s land(As from a
sycamore, his sounding steelLopp’d the green arms to spoke a chariot wheel)To
Lemnos’ isle he sold the royal slave,Where Jason’s son the price demanded
gave;But kind Eetion, touching on the shore,The ransom’d prince to fair Arisbe
bore.Ten days were past, since in his father’s reignHe felt the sweets of
liberty again;The next, that god whom men in vain withstandGives the same youth
to the same conquering handNow never to return! and doom’d to goA sadder journey
to the shades below.His well-known face when great Achilles eyed,(The helm and
visor he had cast asideWith wild affright, and dropp’d upon the fieldHis useless
lance and unavailing shield,)As trembling, panting, from the stream he fled,And
knock’d his faltering knees, the hero said:“Ye mighty gods! what wonders strike
my view!Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue?Sure I shall see yon heaps of
Trojans kill’dRise from the shades, and brave me on the field;As now the
captive, whom so late I boundAnd sold to Lemnos, stalks on Trojan ground!Not him
the sea’s unmeasured deeps detain,That bar such numbers from their native
plain;Lo! he returns. Try, then, my flying spear!Try, if the grave can hold the
wanderer;If earth, at length this active prince can seize,Earth, whose strong
grasp has held down Hercules.”Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with
fearsApproach’d, and sought his knees with suppliant tearsLoth as he was to
yield his youthful breath,And his soul shivering at the approach of
death.Achilles raised the spear, prepared to wound;He kiss’d his feet, extended
on the ground:And while, above, the spear suspended stood,Longing to dip its
thirsty point in blood,One hand embraced them close, one stopp’d the dart,While
thus these melting words attempt his heart:“Thy well-known captive, great
Achilles! see,Once more Lycaon trembles at thy knee.Some pity to a suppliant’s
name afford,Who shared the gifts of Ceres at thy board;Whom late thy conquering
arm to Lemnos bore,Far from his father, friends, and native shore;A hundred oxen
were his price that day,Now sums immense thy mercy shall repay.Scarce respited
from woes I yet appear,And scarce twelve morning suns have seen me here;Lo! Jove
again submits me to thy hands,Again, her victim cruel Fate demands!I sprang from
Priam, and Laothoe fair,(Old Altes’ daughter, and Lelegia’s heir;Who held in
Pedasus his famed abode,And ruled the fields where silver Satnio flow’d,)Two
sons (alas! unhappy sons) she bore;For ah! one spear shall drink each brother’s
gore,And I succeed to slaughter’d Polydore.How from that arm of terror shall I
fly?Some demon urges! ’tis my doom to die!If ever yet soft pity touch’d thy
mind,Ah! think not me too much of Hector’s kind!Not the same mother gave thy
suppliant breath,With his, who wrought thy loved Patroclus’ death.”These words,
attended with a shower of tears,The youth address’d to unrelenting ears:“Talk
not of life, or ransom (he replies):Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies:In
vain a single Trojan sues for grace;But least, the sons of Priam’s hateful
race.Die then, my friend! what boots it to deplore?The great, the good Patroclus
is no more!He, far thy better, was foredoom’d to die,And thou, dost thou bewail
mortality?Seest thou not me, whom nature’s gifts adorn,Sprung from a hero, from
a goddess born?The day shall come (which nothing can avert)When by the spear,
the arrow, or the dart,By night, or day, by force, or by design,Impending death
and certain fate are mine!Die then,”—He said; and as the word he spoke,The
fainting stripling sank before the stroke:His hand forgot its grasp, and left
the spear,While all his trembling frame confess’d his fear:Sudden, Achilles his
broad sword display’d,And buried in his neck the reeking blade.Prone fell the
youth; and panting on the land,The gushing purple dyed the thirsty sand.The
victor to the stream the carcase gave,And thus insults him, floating on the
wave:“Lie there, Lycaon! let the fish surroundThy bloated corpse, and suck thy
gory wound:There no sad mother shall thy funerals weep,But swift Scamander roll
thee to the deep,Whose every wave some watery monster brings,To feast unpunish’d
on the fat of kings.So perish Troy, and all the Trojan line!Such ruin theirs,
and such compassion mine.What boots ye now Scamander’s worshipp’d stream,His
earthly honours, and immortal name?In vain your immolated bulls are slain,Your
living coursers glut his gulfs in vain!Thus he rewards you, with this bitter
fate;Thus, till the Grecian vengeance is complete:Thus is atoned Patroclus’
honour’d shade,And the short absence of Achilles paid.”These boastful words
provoked the raging god;With fury swells the violated flood.What means divine
may yet the power employTo check Achilles, and to rescue Troy?Meanwhile the hero
springs in arms, to dareThe great Asteropeus to mortal war;The son of Pelagon,
whose lofty lineFlows from the source of Axius, stream divine!(Fair Peribaea’s
love the god had crown’d,With all his refluent waters circled round:)On him
Achilles rush’d; he fearless stood,And shook two spears, advancing from the
flood;The flood impell’d him, on Pelides’ headTo avenge his waters choked with
heaps of dead.Near as they drew, Achilles thus began:“What art thou, boldest of
the race of man?Who, or from whence? Unhappy is the sireWhose son encounters our
resistless ire.”“O son of Peleus! what avails to trace(Replied the warrior) our
illustrious race?From rich Paeonia’s valleys I command,Arm’d with protended
spears, my native band;Now shines the tenth bright morning since I cameIn aid of
Ilion to the fields of fame:Axius, who swells with all the neighbouring
rills,And wide around the floated region fills,Begot my sire, whose spear much
glory won:Now lift thy arm, and try that hero’s son!”Threatening he said: the
hostile chiefs advance;At once Asteropeus discharged each lance,(For both his
dexterous hands the lance could wield,)One struck, but pierced not, the
Vulcanian shield;One razed Achilles’ hand; the spouting bloodSpun forth; in
earth the fasten’d weapon stood.Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies:Its
erring fury hiss’d along the skies;Deep in the swelling bank was driven the
spear,Even to the middle earth; and quiver’d there.Then from his side the sword
Pelides drew,And on his foe with double fury flew.The foe thrice tugg’d, and
shook the rooted wood;Repulsive of his might the weapon stood:The fourth, he
tries to break the spear in vain;Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain;His
belly open’d with a ghastly wound,The reeking entrails pour upon the
ground.Beneath the hero’s feet he panting lies,And his eye darkens, and his
spirit flies;While the proud victor thus triumphing said,His radiant armour
tearing from the dead:“So ends thy glory! Such the fate they prove,Who strive
presumptuous with the sons of Jove!Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy
line?But great Saturnius is the source of mine.How durst thou vaunt thy watery
progeny?Of Peleus, Æacus, and Jove, am I.The race of these superior far to
those,As he that thunders to the stream that flows.What rivers can, Scamander
might have shown;But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son.Even Achelous
might contend in vain,And all the roaring billows of the main.The eternal ocean,
from whose fountains flowThe seas, the rivers, and the springs below,The
thundering voice of Jove abhors to hear,And in his deep abysses shakes with
fear.”He said: then from the bank his javelin tore,And left the breathless
warrior in his gore.The floating tides the bloody carcase lave,And beat against
it, wave succeeding wave;Till, roll’d between the banks, it lies the foodOf
curling eels, and fishes of the flood.All scatter’d round the stream (their
mightiest slain)The amazed Pæonians scour along the plain;He vents his fury on
the flying crew,Thrasius, Astyplus, and Mnesus slew;Mydon, Thersilochus, with
Ænius, fell;And numbers more his lance had plunged to hell,But from the bottom
of his gulfs profoundScamander spoke; the shores return’d the sound.“O first of
mortals! (for the gods are thine)In valour matchless, and in force divine!If
Jove have given thee every Trojan head,’Tis not on me thy rage should heap the
dead.See! my choked streams no more their course can keep,Nor roll their wonted
tribute to the deep.Turn then, impetuous! from our injured flood;Content, thy
slaughters could amaze a god.”In human form, confess’d before his eyes,The river
thus; and thus the chief replies:“O sacred stream! thy word we shall obey;But
not till Troy the destined vengeance pay,Not till within her towers the perjured
trainShall pant, and tremble at our arms again;Not till proud Hector, guardian
of her wall,Or stain this lance, or see Achilles fall.”He said; and drove with
fury on the foe.Then to the godhead of the silver bowThe yellow flood began: “O
son of Jove!Was not the mandate of the sire aboveFull and express, that Phœbus
should employHis sacred arrows in defence of Troy,And make her conquer, till
Hyperion’s fallIn awful darkness hide the face of all?”He spoke in vain—The
chief without dismayPloughs through the boiling surge his desperate way.Then
rising in his rage above the shores,From all his deep the bellowing river
roars,Huge heaps of slain disgorges on the coast,And round the banks the ghastly
dead are toss’d.While all before, the billows ranged on high,(A watery bulwark,)
screen the bands who fly.Now bursting on his head with thundering sound,The
falling deluge whelms the hero round:His loaded shield bends to the rushing
tide;His feet, upborne, scarce the strong flood divide,Sliddering, and
staggering. On the border stoodA spreading elm, that overhung the flood;He
seized a bending bough, his steps to stay;The plant uprooted to his weight gave
way.[270]Heaving the bank, and undermining all;Loud flash the waters to the
rushing fallOf the thick foliage. The large trunk display’dBridged the rough
flood across: the hero stay’dOn this his weight, and raised upon his hand,Leap’d
from the channel, and regain’d the land.Then blacken’d the wild waves: the
murmur rose:The god pursues, a huger billow throws,And bursts the bank,
ambitious to destroyThe man whose fury is the fate of Troy.He like the warlike
eagle speeds his pace(Swiftest and strongest of the aerial race);Far as a spear
can fly, Achilles springs;At every bound his clanging armour rings:Now here, now
there, he turns on every side,And winds his course before the following tide;The
waves flow after, wheresoe’er he wheels,And gather fast, and murmur at his
heels.So when a peasant to his garden bringsSoft rills of water from the
bubbling springs,And calls the floods from high, to bless his bowers,And feed
with pregnant streams the plants and flowers:Soon as he clears whate’er their
passage stay’d,And marks the future current with his spade,Swift o’er the
rolling pebbles, down the hills,Louder and louder purl the falling rills;Before
him scattering, they prevent his pains,And shine in mazy wanderings o’er the
plains.Still flies Achilles, but before his eyesStill swift Scamander rolls
where’er he flies:Not all his speed escapes the rapid floods;The first of men,
but not a match for gods.Oft as he turn’d the torrent to oppose,And bravely try
if all the powers were foes;So oft the surge, in watery mountains spread,Beats
on his back, or bursts upon his head.Yet dauntless still the adverse flood he
braves,And still indignant bounds above the waves.Tired by the tides, his knees
relax with toil;Wash’d from beneath him slides the slimy soil;When thus (his
eyes on heaven’s expansion thrown)Forth bursts the hero with an angry groan:“Is
there no god Achilles to befriend,No power to avert his miserable end?Prevent, O
Jove! this ignominious date,[271]And make my future life the sport of fate.Of
all heaven’s oracles believed in vain,But most of Thetis must her son
complain;By Phœbus’ darts she prophesied my fall,In glorious arms before the
Trojan wall.Oh! had I died in fields of battle warm,Stretch’d like a hero, by a
hero’s arm!Might Hector’s spear this dauntless bosom rend,And my swift soul
o’ertake my slaughter’d friend.Ah no! Achilles meets a shameful fate,Oh how
unworthy of the brave and great!Like some vile swain, whom on a rainy
day,Crossing a ford, the torrent sweeps away,An unregarded carcase to the
sea.”Neptune and Pallas haste to his relief,And thus in human form address’d the
chief:The power of ocean first: “Forbear thy fear,O son of Peleus! Lo, thy gods
appear!Behold! from Jove descending to thy aid,Propitious Neptune, and the
blue-eyed maid.Stay, and the furious flood shall cease to rave’Tis not thy fate
to glut his angry wave.But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!Nor breathe
from combat, nor thy sword suspend,Till Troy receive her flying sons, till
allHer routed squadrons pant behind their wall:Hector alone shall stand his
fatal chance,And Hector’s blood shall smoke upon thy lance.Thine is the glory
doom’d.” Thus spake the gods:Then swift ascended to the bright abodes.Stung with
new ardour, thus by heaven impell’d,He springs impetuous, and invades the
field:O’er all the expanded plain the waters spread;Heaved on the bounding
billows danced the dead,Floating ’midst scatter’d arms; while casques of goldAnd
turn’d-up bucklers glitter’d as they roll’d.High o’er the surging tide, by leaps
and bounds,He wades, and mounts; the parted wave resounds.Not a whole river
stops the hero’s course,While Pallas fills him with immortal force.With equal
rage, indignant Xanthus roars,And lifts his billows, and o’erwhelms his
shores.Then thus to Simois! “Haste, my brother flood;And check this mortal that
controls a god;Our bravest heroes else shall quit the fight,And Ilion tumble
from her towery height.Call then thy subject streams, and bid them roar,From all
thy fountains swell thy watery store,With broken rocks, and with a load of
dead,Charge the black surge, and pour it on his head.Mark how resistless through
the floods he goes,And boldly bids the warring gods be foes!But nor that force,
nor form divine to sight,Shall aught avail him, if our rage unite:Whelm’d under
our dark gulfs those arms shall lie,That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan
eye;And deep beneath a sandy mountain hurl’d,Immersed remain this terror of the
world.Such ponderous ruin shall confound the place,No Greeks shall e’er his
perish’d relics grace,No hand his bones shall gather, or inhume;These his cold
rites, and this his watery tomb.”[Illustration: ] ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE
RIVERSHe said; and on the chief descends amain,Increased with gore, and swelling
with the slain.Then, murmuring from his beds, he boils, he raves,And a foam
whitens on the purple waves:At every step, before Achilles stoodThe crimson
surge, and deluged him with blood.Fear touch’d the queen of heaven: she saw
dismay’d,She call’d aloud, and summon’d Vulcan’s aid.“Rise to the war! the
insulting flood requiresThy wasteful arm! assemble all thy fires!While to their
aid, by our command enjoin’d,Rush the swift eastern and the western wind:These
from old ocean at my word shall blow,Pour the red torrent on the watery
foe,Corses and arms to one bright ruin turn,And hissing rivers to their bottoms
burn.Go, mighty in thy rage! display thy power,Drink the whole flood, the
crackling trees devour.Scorch all the banks! and (till our voice reclaim)Exert
the unwearied furies of the flame!”The power ignipotent her word obeys:Wide o’er
the plain he pours the boundless blaze;At once consumes the dead, and dries the
soilAnd the shrunk waters in their channel boil.As when autumnal Boreas sweeps
the sky,And instant blows the water’d gardens dry:So look’d the field, so
whiten’d was the ground,While Vulcan breathed the fiery blast around.Swift on
the sedgy reeds the ruin preys;Along the margin winds the running blaze:The
trees in flaming rows to ashes turn,The flowering lotos and the tamarisk
burn,Broad elm, and cypress rising in a spire;The watery willows hiss before the
fire.Now glow the waves, the fishes pant for breath,The eels lie twisting in the
pangs of death:Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly fry,Or, gasping, turn their
bellies to the sky.At length the river rear’d his languid head,And thus,
short-panting, to the god he said:“Oh Vulcan! oh! what power resists thy might?I
faint, I sink, unequal to the fight—I yield—Let Ilion fall; if fate
decree—Ah—bend no more thy fiery arms on me!”He ceased; wide conflagration
blazing round;The bubbling waters yield a hissing sound.As when the flames
beneath a cauldron rise,[272]To melt the fat of some rich sacrifice,Amid the
fierce embrace of circling firesThe waters foam, the heavy smoke aspires:So
boils the imprison’d flood, forbid to flow,And choked with vapours feels his
bottom glow.To Juno then, imperial queen of air,The burning river sends his
earnest prayer:“Ah why, Saturnia; must thy son engageMe, only me, with all his
wasteful rage?On other gods his dreadful arm employ,For mightier gods assert the
cause of Troy.Submissive I desist, if thou command;But ah! withdraw this
all-destroying hand.Hear then my solemn oath, to yield to fateUnaided Ilion, and
her destined state,Till Greece shall gird her with destructive flame,And in one
ruin sink the Trojan name.”His warm entreaty touch’d Saturnia’s ear:She bade the
ignipotent his rage forbear,Recall the flame, nor in a mortal causeInfest a god:
the obedient flame withdraws:Again the branching streams begin to spread,And
soft remurmur in their wonted bed.While these by Juno’s will the strife
resign,The warring gods in fierce contention join:Rekindling rage each heavenly
breast alarms:With horrid clangour shock the ethereal arms:Heaven in loud
thunder bids the trumpet sound;And wide beneath them groans the rending
ground.Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries,And views contending gods
with careless eyes.The power of battles lifts his brazen spear,And first
assaults the radiant queen of war:“What moved thy madness, thus to
disuniteEthereal minds, and mix all heaven in fight?What wonder this, when in
thy frantic moodThou drovest a mortal to insult a god?Thy impious hand Tydides’
javelin bore,And madly bathed it in celestial gore.”He spoke, and smote the
long-resounding shield,Which bears Jove’s thunder on its dreadful field:The
adamantine ægis of her sire,That turns the glancing bolt and forked fire.Then
heaved the goddess in her mighty handA stone, the limit of the neighbouring
land,There fix’d from eldest times; black, craggy, vast;This at the heavenly
homicide she cast.Thundering he falls, a mass of monstrous size:And seven broad
acres covers as he lies.The stunning stroke his stubborn nerves unbound:Loud
o’er the fields his ringing arms resound:The scornful dame her conquest views
with smiles,And, glorying, thus the prostrate god reviles:“Hast thou not yet,
insatiate fury! knownHow far Minerva’s force transcends thy own?Juno, whom thou
rebellious darest withstand,Corrects thy folly thus by Pallas’ hand;Thus meets
thy broken faith with just disgrace,And partial aid to Troy’s perfidious
race.”The goddess spoke, and turn’d her eyes away,That, beaming round, diffused
celestial day.Jove’s Cyprian daughter, stooping on the land,Lent to the wounded
god her tender hand:Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with pain,And, propp’d on
her fair arm, forsakes the plain.This the bright empress of the heavens
survey’d,And, scoffing, thus to war’s victorious maid:“Lo! what an aid on Mars’s
side is seen!The smiles’ and loves’ unconquerable queen!Mark with what
insolence, in open view,She moves: let Pallas, if she dares, pursue.”Minerva
smiling heard, the pair o’ertook,And slightly on her breast the wanton
strook:She, unresisting, fell (her spirits fled);On earth together lay the
lovers spread.“And like these heroes be the fate of all(Minerva cries) who guard
the Trojan wall!To Grecian gods such let the Phrygian be,So dread, so fierce, as
Venus is to me;Then from the lowest stone shall Troy be moved.”Thus she, and
Juno with a smile approved.Meantime, to mix in more than mortal fight,The god of
ocean dares the god of light.“What sloth has seized us, when the fields
aroundRing with conflicting powers, and heaven returns the sound:Shall,
ignominious, we with shame retire,No deed perform’d, to our Olympian sire?Come,
prove thy arm! for first the war to wage,Suits not my greatness, or superior
age:Rash as thou art to prop the Trojan throne,(Forgetful of my wrongs, and of
thy own,)And guard the race of proud Laomedon!Hast thou forgot, how, at the
monarch’s prayer,We shared the lengthen’d labours of a year?Troy walls I raised
(for such were Jove’s commands),And yon proud bulwarks grew beneath my hands:Thy
task it was to feed the bellowing drovesAlong fair Ida’s vales and pendant
groves.But when the circling seasons in their trainBrought back the grateful day
that crown’d our pain,With menace stern the fraudful king defiedOur latent
godhead, and the prize denied:Mad as he was, he threaten’d servile bands,And
doom’d us exiles far in barbarous lands.[273]Incensed, we heavenward fled with
swiftest wing,And destined vengeance on the perjured king.Dost thou, for this,
afford proud Ilion grace,And not, like us, infest the faithless race;Like us,
their present, future sons destroy,And from its deep foundations heave their
Troy?”Apollo thus: “To combat for mankindIll suits the wisdom of celestial
mind;For what is man? Calamitous by birth,They owe their life and nourishment to
earth;Like yearly leaves, that now, with beauty crown’d,Smile on the sun; now,
wither on the ground.To their own hands commit the frantic scene,Nor mix
immortals in a cause so mean.”Then turns his face, far-beaming heavenly
fires,And from the senior power submiss retires:Him thus retreating, Artemis
upbraids,The quiver’d huntress of the sylvan shades:“And is it thus the youthful
Phœbus flies,And yields to ocean’s hoary sire the prize?How vain that martial
pomp, and dreadful showOf pointed arrows and the silver bow!Now boast no more in
yon celestial bower,Thy force can match the great earth-shaking power.”Silent he
heard the queen of woods upbraid:Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting maid:But
furious thus: “What insolence has drivenThy pride to face the majesty of
heaven?What though by Jove the female plague design’d,Fierce to the feeble race
of womankind,The wretched matron feels thy piercing dart;Thy sex’s tyrant, with
a tiger’s heart?What though tremendous in the woodland chaseThy certain arrows
pierce the savage race?How dares thy rashness on the powers divineEmploy those
arms, or match thy force with mine?Learn hence, no more unequal war to wage—”She
said, and seized her wrists with eager rage;These in her left hand lock’d, her
right untiedThe bow, the quiver, and its plumy pride.About her temples flies the
busy bow;Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow;The scattering arrows,
rattling from the case,Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place.Swift from the
field the baffled huntress flies,And scarce restrains the torrent in her
eyes:So, when the falcon wings her way above,To the cleft cavern speeds the
gentle dove;(Not fated yet to die;) there safe retreats,Yet still her heart
against the marble beats.To her Latona hastes with tender care;Whom Hermes
viewing, thus declines the war:“How shall I face the dame, who gives delightTo
him whose thunders blacken heaven with night?Go, matchless goddess! triumph in
the skies,And boast my conquest, while I yield the prize.”He spoke; and pass’d:
Latona, stooping low,Collects the scatter’d shafts and fallen bow,That,
glittering on the dust, lay here and thereDishonour’d relics of Diana’s war:Then
swift pursued her to her blest abode,Where, all confused, she sought the
sovereign god;Weeping, she grasp’d his knees: the ambrosial vestShook with her
sighs, and panted on her breast.The sire superior smiled, and bade her showWhat
heavenly hand had caused his daughter’s woe?Abash’d, she names his own imperial
spouse;And the pale crescent fades upon her brows.Thus they above: while,
swiftly gliding down,Apollo enters Ilion’s sacred town;The guardian-god now
trembled for her wall,And fear’d the Greeks, though fate forbade her fall.Back
to Olympus, from the war’s alarms,Return the shining bands of gods in arms;Some
proud in triumph, some with rage on fire;And take their thrones around the
ethereal sire.Through blood, through death, Achilles still proceeds,O’er
slaughter’d heroes, and o’er rolling steeds.As when avenging flames with fury
drivenOn guilty towns exert the wrath of heaven;The pale inhabitants, some fall,
some fly;And the red vapours purple all the sky:So raged Achilles: death and
dire dismay,And toils, and terrors, fill’d the dreadful day.High on a turret
hoary Priam stands,And marks the waste of his destructive hands;Views, from his
arm, the Trojans’ scatter’d flight,And the near hero rising on his sight!No
stop, no check, no aid! With feeble pace,And settled sorrow on his aged
face,Fast as he could, he sighing quits the walls;And thus descending, on the
guards he calls:“You to whose care our city-gates belong,Set wide your portals
to the flying throng:For lo! he comes, with unresisted sway;He comes, and
desolation marks his way!But when within the walls our troops take breath,Lock
fast the brazen bars, and shut out death.”Thus charged the reverend monarch:
wide were flungThe opening folds; the sounding hinges rung.Phœbus rush’d forth,
the flying bands to meet;Struck slaughter back, and cover’d the retreat,On heaps
the Trojans crowd to gain the gate,And gladsome see their last escape from
fate.Thither, all parch’d with thirst, a heartless train,Hoary with dust, they
beat the hollow plain:And gasping, panting, fainting, labour onWith heavier
strides, that lengthen toward the town.Enraged Achilles follows with his
spear;Wild with revenge, insatiable of war.Then had the Greeks eternal praise
acquired,And Troy inglorious to her walls retired;But he, the god who darts
ethereal flame,Shot down to save her, and redeem her fame:To young Agenor force
divine he gave;(Antenor’s offspring, haughty, bold, and brave;)In aid of him,
beside the beech he sate,And wrapt in clouds, restrain’d the hand of fate.When
now the generous youth Achilles spies,Thick beats his heart, the troubled
motions rise.(So, ere a storm, the waters heave and roll.)He stops, and
questions thus his mighty soul;“What, shall I fly this terror of the plain!Like
others fly, and be like others slain?Vain hope! to shun him by the self-same
roadYon line of slaughter’d Trojans lately trod.No: with the common heap I scorn
to fall—What if they pass’d me to the Trojan wall,While I decline to yonder
path, that leadsTo Ida’s forests and surrounding shades?So may I reach,
conceal’d, the cooling flood,From my tired body wash the dirt and blood,As soon
as night her dusky veil extends,Return in safety to my Trojan friends.What
if?—But wherefore all this vain debate?Stand I to doubt, within the reach of
fate?Even now perhaps, ere yet I turn the wall,The fierce Achilles sees me, and
I fall:Such is his swiftness, ’tis in vain to fly,And such his valour, that who
stands must die.Howe’er ’tis better, fighting for the state,Here, and in public
view, to meet my fate.Yet sure he too is mortal; he may feel(Like all the sons
of earth) the force of steel.One only soul informs that dreadful frame:And
Jove’s sole favour gives him all his fame.”He said, and stood, collected, in his
might;And all his beating bosom claim’d the fight.So from some deep-grown wood a
panther starts,Roused from his thicket by a storm of darts:Untaught to fear or
fly, he hears the soundsOf shouting hunters, and of clamorous hounds;Though
struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the pain;And the barb’d javelin stings
his breast in vain:On their whole war, untamed, the savage flies;And tears his
hunter, or beneath him dies.Not less resolved, Antenor’s valiant heirConfronts
Achilles, and awaits the war,Disdainful of retreat: high held before,His shield
(a broad circumference) he bore;Then graceful as he stood, in act to throwThe
lifted javelin, thus bespoke the foe:“How proud Achilles glories in his fame!And
hopes this day to sink the Trojan nameBeneath her ruins! Know, that hope is
vain;A thousand woes, a thousand toils remain.Parents and children our just arms
employ,And strong and many are the sons of Troy.Great as thou art, even thou
may’st stain with goreThese Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore.”He said:
with matchless force the javelin flungSmote on his knee; the hollow cuishes
rungBeneath the pointed steel; but safe from harmsHe stands impassive in the
ethereal arms.Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe,His lifted arm prepares
the fatal blow:But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shroudsThe god-like Trojan in a
veil of clouds.Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view,Dismiss’d with fame,
the favoured youth withdrew.Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape,Assumes
Agenor’s habit, voice and shape,Flies from the furious chief in this
disguise;The furious chief still follows where he flies.Now o’er the fields they
stretch with lengthen’d strides,Now urge the course where swift Scamander
glides:The god, now distant scarce a stride before,Tempts his pursuit, and
wheels about the shore;While all the flying troops their speed employ,And pour
on heaps into the walls of Troy:No stop, no stay; no thought to ask, or tell,Who
’scaped by flight, or who by battle fell.’Twas tumult all, and violence of
flight;And sudden joy confused, and mix’d affright.Pale Troy against Achilles
shuts her gate:And nations breathe, deliver’d from their fate.BOOK
XXII.ARGUMENT.THE DEATH OF HECTOR.The Trojans being safe within the walls,
Hector only stays to opposeAchilles. Priam is struck at his approach, and tries
to persuade hisson to re-enter the town. Hecuba joins her entreaties, but in
vain.Hector consults within himself what measures to take; but at theadvance of
Achilles, his resolution fails him, and he flies. Achillespursues him thrice
round the walls of Troy. The gods debate concerningthe fate of Hector; at length
Minerva descends to the aid of Achilles.She deludes Hector in the shape of
Deiphobus; he stands the combat, andis slain. Achilles drags the dead body at
his chariot in the sight ofPriam and Hecuba. Their lamentations, tears, and
despair. Their criesreach the ears of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was
retired intothe inner part of the palace: she mounts up to the walls, and
beholdsher dead husband. She swoons at the spectacle. Her excess of grief
andlamentation. The thirtieth day still continues. The scene lies under the
walls, and on the battlements of Troy.Thus to their bulwarks, smit with panic
fear,The herded Ilians rush like driven deer:There safe they wipe the briny
drops away,And drown in bowls the labours of the day.Close to the walls,
advancing o’er the fieldsBeneath one roof of well-compacted shields,March,
bending on, the Greeks’ embodied powers,Far stretching in the shade of Trojan
towers.Great Hector singly stay’d: chain’d down by fateThere fix’d he stood
before the Scæan gate;Still his bold arms determined to employ,The guardian
still of long-defended Troy.Apollo now to tired Achilles turns:(The power
confess’d in all his glory burns:)“And what (he cries) has Peleus’ son in
view,With mortal speed a godhead to pursue?For not to thee to know the gods is
given,Unskill’d to trace the latent marks of heaven.What boots thee now, that
Troy forsook the plain?Vain thy past labour, and thy present vain:Safe in their
walls are now her troops bestow’d,While here thy frantic rage attacks a god.”The
chief incensed—“Too partial god of day!To check my conquests in the middle
way:How few in Ilion else had refuge found!What gasping numbers now had bit the
ground!Thou robb’st me of a glory justly mine,Powerful of godhead, and of fraud
divine:Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain,To cheat a mortal who repines
in vain.”Then to the city, terrible and strong,With high and haughty steps he
tower’d along,So the proud courser, victor of the prize,To the near goal with
double ardour flies.Him, as he blazing shot across the field,The careful eyes of
Priam first beheld.Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,[274]Through the
thick gloom of some tempestuous night,Orion’s dog (the year when autumn
weighs),And o’er the feebler stars exerts his rays;Terrific glory! for his
burning breathTaints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.So flamed his
fiery mail. Then wept the sage:He strikes his reverend head, now white with
age;He lifts his wither’d arms; obtests the skies;He calls his much-loved son
with feeble cries:The son, resolved Achilles’ force to dare,Full at the Scæan
gates expects the war;While the sad father on the rampart stands,And thus
adjures him with extended hands:“Ah stay not, stay not! guardless and
alone;Hector! my loved, my dearest, bravest son!Methinks already I behold thee
slain,And stretch’d beneath that fury of the plain.Implacable Achilles! might’st
thou beTo all the gods no dearer than to me!Thee, vultures wild should scatter
round the shore,And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore.How many valiant sons
I late enjoy’d,Valiant in vain! by thy cursed arm destroy’d:Or, worse than
slaughtered, sold in distant islesTo shameful bondage, and unworthy toils.Two,
while I speak, my eyes in vain explore,Two from one mother sprung, my
Polydore,And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more!Oh! if in yonder hostile camp
they live,What heaps of gold, what treasures would I give!(Their grandsire’s
wealth, by right of birth their own,Consign’d his daughter with Lelegia’s
throne:)But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost,All pale they wander on the
Stygian coast;What sorrows then must their sad mother know,What anguish I?
unutterable woe!Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me,Less to all Troy, if
not deprived of thee.Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall;And spare thyself,
thy father, spare us all!Save thy dear life; or, if a soul so braveNeglect that
thought, thy dearer glory save.Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs;While
yet thy father feels the woes he bears,Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in
his rage(All trembling on the verge of helpless age)Great Jove has placed, sad
spectacle of pain!The bitter dregs of fortune’s cup to drain:To fill with scenes
of death his closing eyes,And number all his days by miseries!My heroes slain,
my bridal bed o’erturn’d,My daughters ravish’d, and my city burn’d,My bleeding
infants dash’d against the floor;These I have yet to see, perhaps yet
more!Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate,The last sad relic of my ruin’d
state,(Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall,And stain the pavement of
my regal hall;Where famish’d dogs, late guardians of my door,Shall lick their
mangled master’s spatter’d gore.Yet for my sons I thank ye, gods! ’tis well;Well
have they perish’d, for in fight they fell.Who dies in youth and vigour, dies
the best,Struck through with wounds, all honest on the breast.But when the
fates, in fulness of their rage,Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age,In dust
the reverend lineaments deform,And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely
warm:This, this is misery! the last, the worse,That man can feel! man, fated to
be cursed!”He said, and acting what no words could say,Rent from his head the
silver locks away.With him the mournful mother bears a part;Yet all her sorrows
turn not Hector’s heart.The zone unbraced, her bosom she display’d;And thus,
fast-falling the salt tears, she said:“Have mercy on me, O my son! revereThe
words of age; attend a parent’s prayer!If ever thee in these fond arms I
press’d,Or still’d thy infant clamours at this breast;Ah do not thus our
helpless years forego,But, by our walls secured, repel the foe.Against his rage
if singly thou proceed,Should’st thou, (but Heaven avert it!) should’st thou
bleed,Nor must thy corse lie honour’d on the bier,Nor spouse, nor mother, grace
thee with a tear!Far from our pious rites those dear remainsMust feast the
vultures on the naked plains.”So they, while down their cheeks the torrents
roll;But fix’d remains the purpose of his soul;Resolved he stands, and with a
fiery glanceExpects the hero’s terrible advance.So, roll’d up in his den, the
swelling snakeBeholds the traveller approach the brake;When fed with noxious
herbs his turgid veinsHave gather’d half the poisons of the plains;He burns, he
stiffens with collected ire,And his red eyeballs glare with living fire.Beneath
a turret, on his shield reclined,He stood, and question’d thus his mighty
mind:[275]“Where lies my way? to enter in the wall?Honour and shame the
ungenerous thought recall:Shall proud Polydamas before the gateProclaim, his
counsels are obey’d too late,Which timely follow’d but the former night,What
numbers had been saved by Hector’s flight?That wise advice rejected with
disdain,I feel my folly in my people slain.Methinks my suffering country’s voice
I hear,But most her worthless sons insult my ear,On my rash courage charge the
chance of war,And blame those virtues which they cannot share.No—if I e’er
return, return I mustGlorious, my country’s terror laid in dust:Or if I perish,
let her see me fallIn field at least, and fighting for her wall.And yet suppose
these measures I forego,Approach unarm’d, and parley with the foe,The
warrior-shield, the helm, and lance, lay down,And treat on terms of peace to
save the town:The wife withheld, the treasure ill-detain’d(Cause of the war, and
grievance of the land)With honourable justice to restore:And add half Ilion’s
yet remaining store,Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured GreeceMay
share our wealth, and leave our walls in peace.But why this thought? Unarm’d if
I should go,What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe,But woman-like to fall,
and fall without a blow?We greet not here, as man conversing man,Met at an oak,
or journeying o’er a plain;No season now for calm familiar talk,Like youths and
maidens in an evening walk:War is our business, but to whom is givenTo die, or
triumph, that, determine Heaven!”Thus pondering, like a god the Greek drew
nigh;His dreadful plumage nodded from on high;The Pelian javelin, in his better
hand,Shot trembling rays that glitter’d o’er the land;And on his breast the
beamy splendour shone,Like Jove’s own lightning, or the rising sun.As Hector
sees, unusual terrors rise,Struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies.He
leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind:Achilles follows like the winged
wind.Thus at the panting dove a falcon flies(The swiftest racer of the liquid
skies),Just when he holds, or thinks he holds his prey,Obliquely wheeling
through the aerial way,With open beak and shrilling cries he springs,And aims
his claws, and shoots upon his wings:No less fore-right the rapid chase they
held,One urged by fury, one by fear impell’d:Now circling round the walls their
course maintain,Where the high watch-tower overlooks the plain;Now where the
fig-trees spread their umbrage broad,(A wider compass,) smoke along the
road.Next by Scamander’s double source they bound,Where two famed fountains
burst the parted ground;This hot through scorching clefts is seen to rise,With
exhalations steaming to the skies;That the green banks in summer’s heat
o’erflows,Like crystal clear, and cold as winter snows:Each gushing fount a
marble cistern fills,Whose polish’d bed receives the falling rills;Where Trojan
dames (ere yet alarm’d by Greece)Wash’d their fair garments in the days of
peace.[276]By these they pass’d, one chasing, one in flight:(The mighty fled,
pursued by stronger might:)Swift was the course; no vulgar prize they play,No
vulgar victim must reward the day:(Such as in races crown the speedy strife:)The
prize contended was great Hector’s life.As when some hero’s funerals are
decreedIn grateful honour of the mighty dead;Where high rewards the vigorous
youth inflame(Some golden tripod, or some lovely dame)The panting coursers
swiftly turn the goal,And with them turns the raised spectator’s soul:Thus three
times round the Trojan wall they fly.The gazing gods lean forward from the
sky;To whom, while eager on the chase they look,The sire of mortals and
immortals spoke:“Unworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven,Behold, inglorious
round yon city driven!My heart partakes the generous Hector’s pain;Hector, whose
zeal whole hecatombs has slain,Whose grateful fumes the gods received with
joy,From Ida’s summits, and the towers of Troy:Now see him flying; to his fears
resign’d,And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.Consult, ye powers! (’tis
worthy your debate)Whether to snatch him from impending fate,Or let him bear, by
stern Pelides slain,(Good as he is) the lot imposed on man.”Then Pallas thus:
“Shall he whose vengeance formsThe forky bolt, and blackens heaven with
storms,Shall he prolong one Trojan’s forfeit breath?A man, a mortal,
pre-ordain’d to death!And will no murmurs fill the courts above?No gods
indignant blame their partial Jove?”“Go then (return’d the sire) without
delay,Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way.”Swift at the mandate pleased
Tritonia flies,And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.As through the
forest, o’er the vale and lawn,The well-breath’d beagle drives the flying
fawn,In vain he tries the covert of the brakes,Or deep beneath the trembling
thicket shakes;Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews,The certain hound his
various maze pursues.Thus step by step, where’er the Trojan wheel’d,There swift
Achilles compass’d round the field.Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends,And
hopes the assistance of his pitying friends,(Whose showering arrows, as he
coursed below,From the high turrets might oppress the foe,)So oft Achilles turns
him to the plain:He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain.As men in slumbers seem
with speedy pace,One to pursue, and one to lead the chase,Their sinking limbs
the fancied course forsake,Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake:No less the
labouring heroes pant and strain:While that but flies, and this pursues in
vain.What god, O muse, assisted Hector’s forceWith fate itself so long to hold
the course?Phœbus it was; who, in his latest hour,Endued his knees with
strength, his nerves with power:And great Achilles, lest some Greek’s
advanceShould snatch the glory from his lifted lance,Sign’d to the troops to
yield his foe the way,And leave untouch’d the honours of the day.Jove lifts the
golden balances, that showThe fates of mortal men, and things below:Here each
contending hero’s lot he tries,And weighs, with equal hand, their destinies.Low
sinks the scale surcharged with Hector’s fate;Heavy with death it sinks, and
hell receives the weight.Then Phœbus left him. Fierce Minerva fliesTo stern
Pelides, and triumphing, cries:“O loved of Jove! this day our labours cease,And
conquest blazes with full beams on Greece.Great Hector falls; that Hector famed
so far,Drunk with renown, insatiable of war,Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor
force, nor flight,Shall more avail him, nor his god of light.See, where in vain
he supplicates above,Roll’d at the feet of unrelenting Jove;Rest here: myself
will lead the Trojan on,And urge to meet the fate he cannot shun.”Her voice
divine the chief with joyful mindObey’d; and rested, on his lance reclinedWhile
like Deiphobus the martial dame(Her face, her gesture, and her arms the same),In
show an aid, by hapless Hector’s sideApproach’d, and greets him thus with voice
belied:“Too long, O Hector! have I borne the sightOf this distress, and sorrow’d
in thy flight:It fits us now a noble stand to make,And here, as brothers, equal
fates partake.”Then he: “O prince! allied in blood and fame,Dearer than all that
own a brother’s name;Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore,Long tried, long loved:
much loved, but honoured more!Since you, of all our numerous race aloneDefend my
life, regardless of your own.”Again the goddess: “Much my father’s prayer,And
much my mother’s, press’d me to forbear:My friends embraced my knees, adjured my
stay,But stronger love impell’d, and I obey.Come then, the glorious conflict let
us try,Let the steel sparkle, and the javelin fly;Or let us stretch Achilles on
the field,Or to his arm our bloody trophies yield.”Fraudful she said; then
swiftly march’d before:The Dardan hero shuns his foe no more.Sternly they met.
The silence Hector broke:His dreadful plumage nodded as he spoke:“Enough, O son
of Peleus! Troy has view’dHer walls thrice circled, and her chief pursued.But
now some god within me bids me tryThine, or my fate: I kill thee, or I die.Yet
on the verge of battle let us stay,And for a moment’s space suspend the day;Let
Heaven’s high powers be call’d to arbitrateThe just conditions of this stern
debate,(Eternal witnesses of all below,And faithful guardians of the treasured
vow!)To them I swear; if, victor in the strife,Jove by these hands shall shed
thy noble life,No vile dishonour shall thy corse pursue;Stripp’d of its arms
alone (the conqueror’s due)The rest to Greece uninjured I’ll restore:Now plight
thy mutual oath, I ask no more.”“Talk not of oaths (the dreadful chief
replies,While anger flash’d from his disdainful eyes),Detested as thou art, and
ought to be,Nor oath nor pact Achilles plights with thee:Such pacts as lambs and
rabid wolves combine,Such leagues as men and furious lions join,To such I call
the gods! one constant stateOf lasting rancour and eternal hate:No thought but
rage, and never-ceasing strife,Till death extinguish rage, and thought, and
life.Rouse then thy forces this important hour,Collect thy soul, and call forth
all thy power.No further subterfuge, no further chance;’Tis Pallas, Pallas gives
thee to my lance.Each Grecian ghost, by thee deprived of breath,Now hovers
round, and calls thee to thy death.”He spoke, and launch’d his javelin at the
foe;But Hector shunn’d the meditated blow:He stoop’d, while o’er his head the
flying spearSang innocent, and spent its force in air.Minerva watch’d it falling
on the land,Then drew, and gave to great Achilles’ hand,Unseen of Hector, who,
elate with joy,Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy.“The life you
boasted to that javelin given,Prince! you have miss’d. My fate depends on
Heaven,To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown,Or what must prove my fortune,
or thy own.Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind,And with false terrors
sink another’s mind.But know, whatever fate I am to try,By no dishonest wound
shall Hector die.I shall not fall a fugitive at least,My soul shall bravely
issue from my breast.But first, try thou my arm; and may this dartEnd all my
country’s woes, deep buried in thy heart.”The weapon flew, its course unerring
held,Unerring, but the heavenly shield repell’dThe mortal dart; resulting with a
boundFrom off the ringing orb, it struck the ground.Hector beheld his javelin
fall in vain,Nor other lance, nor other hope remain;He calls Deiphobus, demands
a spear—In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.All comfortless he stands: then,
with a sigh;“’Tis so—Heaven wills it, and my hour is nigh!I deem’d Deiphobus had
heard my call,But he secure lies guarded in the wall.A god deceived me; Pallas,
’twas thy deed,Death and black fate approach! ’tis I must bleed.No refuge now,
no succour from above,Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove,Propitious
once, and kind! Then welcome fate!’Tis true I perish, yet I perish great:Yet in
a mighty deed I shall expire,Let future ages hear it, and admire!”Fierce, at the
word, his weighty sword he drew,And, all collected, on Achilles flew.So Jove’s
bold bird, high balanced in the air,Stoops from the clouds to truss the
quivering hare.Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares:Before his breast the
flaming shield he bears,Refulgent orb! above his fourfold coneThe gilded
horse-hair sparkled in the sun.Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!)And as
he moved, his figure seem’d on flame.As radiant Hesper shines with keener
light,[277]Far-beaming o’er the silver host of night,When all the starry train
emblaze the sphere:So shone the point of great Achilles’ spear.In his right hand
he waves the weapon round,Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound;But the
rich mail Patroclus lately woreSecurely cased the warrior’s body o’er.One space
at length he spies, to let in fate,Where ’twixt the neck and throat the jointed
plateGave entrance: through that penetrable partFurious he drove the
well-directed dart:Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the powerOf speech,
unhappy! from thy dying hour.Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies,While,
thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries:“At last is Hector stretch’d upon the
plain,Who fear’d no vengeance for Patroclus slain:Then, prince! you should have
fear’d, what now you feel;Achilles absent was Achilles still:Yet a short space
the great avenger stayed,Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid.Peaceful
he sleeps, with all our rites adorn’d,For ever honour’d, and for ever
mourn’d:While cast to all the rage of hostile power,Thee birds shall mangle, and
the gods devour.”Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death:“By thy own
soul! by those who gave thee breath!By all the sacred prevalence of prayer;Ah,
leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear!The common rites of sepulture bestow,To
soothe a father’s and a mother’s woe:Let their large gifts procure an urn at
least,And Hector’s ashes in his country rest.”“No, wretch accursed! relentless
he replies;(Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;)Not those who gave
me breath should bid me spare,Nor all the sacred prevalence of prayer.Could I
myself the bloody banquet join!No—to the dogs that carcase I resign.Should Troy,
to bribe me, bring forth all her store,And giving thousands, offer thousands
more;Should Dardan Priam, and his weeping dame,Drain their whole realm to buy
one funeral flame:Their Hector on the pile they should not see,Nor rob the
vultures of one limb of thee.”Then thus the chief his dying accents drew:“Thy
rage, implacable! too well I knew:The Furies that relentless breast have
steel’d,And cursed thee with a heart that cannot yield.Yet think, a day will
come, when fate’s decreeAnd angry gods shall wreak this wrong on thee;Phœbus and
Paris shall avenge my fate,And stretch thee here before the Scæan gate.”[278]He
ceased. The Fates suppress’d his labouring breath,And his eyes stiffen’d at the
hand of death;To the dark realm the spirit wings its way,(The manly body left a
load of clay,)And plaintive glides along the dreary coast,A naked, wandering,
melancholy ghost!Achilles, musing as he roll’d his eyesO’er the dead hero, thus
unheard, replies:“Die thou the first! When Jove and heaven ordain,I follow
thee”—He said, and stripp’d the slain.Then forcing backward from the gaping
woundThe reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.The thronging Greeks behold with
wondering eyesHis manly beauty and superior size;While some, ignobler, the great
dead defaceWith wounds ungenerous, or with taunts disgrace:“How changed that
Hector, who like Jove of lateSent lightning on our fleets, and scatter’d
fate!”High o’er the slain the great Achilles stands,Begirt with heroes and
surrounding bands;And thus aloud, while all the host attends:“Princes and
leaders! countrymen and friends!Since now at length the powerful will of
heavenThe dire destroyer to our arm has given,Is not Troy fallen already? Haste,
ye powers!See, if already their deserted towersAre left unmann’d; or if they yet
retainThe souls of heroes, their great Hector slain.But what is Troy, or glory
what to me?Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee,Divine Patroclus! Death
hath seal’d his eyes;Unwept, unhonour’d, uninterr’d he lies!Can his dear image
from my soul depart,Long as the vital spirit moves my heart?If in the melancholy
shades below,The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow,Yet mine shall
sacred last; mine, undecay’d,Burn on through death, and animate my
shade.Meanwhile, ye sons of Greece, in triumph bringThe corpse of Hector, and
your pæans sing.Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore,“Hector is dead,
and Ilion is no more.””Then his fell soul a thought of vengeance bred;(Unworthy
of himself, and of the dead;)The nervous ancles bored, his feet he boundWith
thongs inserted through the double wound;These fix’d up high behind the rolling
wain,His graceful head was trail’d along the plain.Proud on his car the
insulting victor stood,And bore aloft his arms, distilling blood.He smites the
steeds; the rapid chariot flies;The sudden clouds of circling dust arise.Now
lost is all that formidable air;The face divine, and long-descending hair,Purple
the ground, and streak the sable sand;Deform’d, dishonour’d, in his native
land,Given to the rage of an insulting throng,And, in his parents’ sight, now
dragg’d along!The mother first beheld with sad survey;She rent her tresses,
venerable grey,And cast, far off, the regal veils away.With piercing shrieks his
bitter fate she moans,While the sad father answers groans with groans,Tears
after tears his mournful cheeks o’erflow,And the whole city wears one face of
woe:No less than if the rage of hostile fires,From her foundations curling to
her spires,O’er the proud citadel at length should rise,And the last blaze send
Ilion to the skies.The wretched monarch of the falling state,Distracted, presses
to the Dardan gate.Scarce the whole people stop his desperate course,While
strong affliction gives the feeble force:Grief tears his heart, and drives him
to and fro,In all the raging impotence of woe.At length he roll’d in dust, and
thus begun,Imploring all, and naming one by one:“Ah! let me, let me go where
sorrow calls;I, only I, will issue from your walls(Guide or companion, friends!
I ask ye none),And bow before the murderer of my son.My grief perhaps his pity
may engage;Perhaps at least he may respect my age.He has a father too; a man
like me;One, not exempt from age and misery(Vigorous no more, as when his young
embraceBegot this pest of me, and all my race).How many valiant sons, in early
bloom,Has that cursed hand sent headlong to the tomb!Thee, Hector! last: thy
loss (divinely brave)Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.O had thy gentle
spirit pass’d in peace,The son expiring in the sire’s embrace,While both thy
parents wept the fatal hour,And, bending o’er thee, mix’d the tender shower!Some
comfort that had been, some sad relief,To melt in full satiety of grief!”Thus
wail’d the father, grovelling on the ground,And all the eyes of Ilion stream’d
around.Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears:(A mourning princess, and a train in
tears;)“Ah why has Heaven prolong’d this hated breath,Patient of horrors, to
behold thy death?O Hector! late thy parents’ pride and joy,The boast of nations!
the defence of Troy!To whom her safety and her fame she owed;Her chief, her
hero, and almost her god!O fatal change! become in one sad dayA senseless corse!
inanimated clay!”But not as yet the fatal news had spreadTo fair Andromache, of
Hector dead;As yet no messenger had told his fate,Not e’en his stay without the
Scæan gate.Far in the close recesses of the dome,Pensive she plied the
melancholy loom;A growing work employ’d her secret hours,Confusedly gay with
intermingled flowers.Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn,The bath
preparing for her lord’s returnIn vain; alas! her lord returns no more;Unbathed
he lies, and bleeds along the shore!Now from the walls the clamours reach her
ear,And all her members shake with sudden fear:Forth from her ivory hand the
shuttle falls,And thus, astonish’d, to her maids she calls:[Illustration: ] THE
BATH“Ah follow me! (she cried) what plaintive noiseInvades my ear? ’Tis sure my
mother’s voice.My faltering knees their trembling frame desert,A pulse unusual
flutters at my heart;Some strange disaster, some reverse of fate(Ye gods avert
it!) threats the Trojan state.Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest!But much
I fear my Hector’s dauntless breastConfronts Achilles; chased along the
plain,Shut from our walls! I fear, I fear him slain!Safe in the crowd he ever
scorn’d to wait,And sought for glory in the jaws of fate:Perhaps that noble heat
has cost his breath,Now quench’d for ever in the arms of death.”She spoke: and
furious, with distracted pace,Fears in her heart, and anguish in her face,Flies
through the dome (the maids her steps pursue),And mounts the walls, and sends
around her view.Too soon her eyes the killing object found,The godlike Hector
dragg’d along the ground.A sudden darkness shades her swimming eyes:She faints,
she falls; her breath, her colour flies.Her hair’s fair ornaments, the braids
that bound,The net that held them, and the wreath that crown’d,The veil and
diadem flew far away(The gift of Venus on her bridal day).Around a train of
weeping sisters stands,To raise her sinking with assistant hands.Scarce from the
verge of death recall’d, againShe faints, or but recovers to
complain.[Illustration: ] ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL“O wretched husband of
a wretched wife!Born with one fate, to one unhappy life!For sure one star its
baneful beam display’dOn Priam’s roof, and Hippoplacia’s shade.From different
parents, different climes we came.At different periods, yet our fate the
same!Why was my birth to great Aëtion owed,And why was all that tender care
bestow’d?Would I had never been!—O thou, the ghostOf my dead husband! miserably
lost!Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!And I abandon’d, desolate, alone!An
only child, once comfort of my pains,Sad product now of hapless love, remains!No
more to smile upon his sire; no friendTo help him now! no father to defend!For
should he ’scape the sword, the common doom,What wrongs attend him, and what
griefs to come!Even from his own paternal roof expell’d,Some stranger ploughs
his patrimonial field.The day, that to the shades the father sends,Robs the sad
orphan of his father’s friends:He, wretched outcast of mankind! appearsFor ever
sad, for ever bathed in tears;Amongst the happy, unregarded, heHangs on the
robe, or trembles at the knee,While those his father’s former bounty fedNor
reach the goblet, nor divide the bread:The kindest but his present wants
allay,To leave him wretched the succeeding day.Frugal compassion! Heedless, they
who boastBoth parents still, nor feel what he has lost,Shall cry, ‘Begone! thy
father feasts not here:’The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.Thus wretched,
thus retiring all in tears,To my sad soul Astyanax appears!Forced by repeated
insults to return,And to his widow’d mother vainly mourn:He, who, with tender
delicacy bred,With princes sported, and on dainties fed,And when still evening
gave him up to rest,Sunk soft in down upon the nurse’s breast,Must—ah what must
he not? Whom Ilion callsAstyanax, from her well-guarded walls,[279]Is now that
name no more, unhappy boy!Since now no more thy father guards his Troy.But thou,
my Hector, liest exposed in air,Far from thy parents’ and thy consort’s
care;Whose hand in vain, directed by her love,The martial scarf and robe of
triumph wove.Now to devouring flames be these a prey,Useless to thee, from this
accursed day!Yet let the sacrifice at least be paid,An honour to the living, not
the dead!”So spake the mournful dame: her matrons hear, Sigh back her sighs,
andanswer tear with tear.BOOK XXIII.ARGUMENT.FUNERAL GAMES IN HONOUR OF
PATROCLUS.[280]Achilles and the Myrmidons do honours to the body of Patroclus.
Afterthe funeral feast he retires to the sea-shore, where, falling asleep,the
ghost of his friend appears to him, and demands the rites ofburial; the next
morning the soldiers are sent with mules and waggonsto fetch wood for the pyre.
The funeral procession, and the offeringtheir hair to the dead. Achilles
sacrifices several animals, and lastlytwelve Trojan captives, at the pile; then
sets fire to it. He payslibations to the Winds, which (at the instance of Iris)
rise, and raisethe flames. When the pile has burned all night, they gather the
bones,place them in an urn of gold, and raise the tomb. Achilles institutesthe
funeral games: the chariot-race, the fight of the caestus, thewrestling, the
foot-race, the single combat, the discus, the shootingwith arrows, the darting
the javelin: the various descriptions ofwhich, and the various success of the
several antagonists, make thegreatest part of the book. In this book ends the
thirtieth day. The night following, the ghost of Patroclus appears to Achilles:
the one-and-thirtieth day is employed in felling the timber for the pile: the
two-and-thirtieth in burning it; and the three-and-thirtieth in the games. The
scene is generally on the sea-shore.Thus humbled in the dust, the pensive
trainThrough the sad city mourn’d her hero slain.The body soil’d with dust, and
black with gore,Lies on broad Hellespont’s resounding shore.The Grecians seek
their ships, and clear the strand,All, but the martial Myrmidonian band:These
yet assembled great Achilles holds,And the stern purpose of his mind
unfolds:“Not yet, my brave companions of the war,Release your smoking coursers
from the car;But, with his chariot each in order led,Perform due honours to
Patroclus dead.Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief,Some rites remain, to
glut our rage of grief.”The troops obey’d; and thrice in order led[281](Achilles
first) their coursers round the dead;And thrice their sorrows and laments
renew;Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew.For such a warrior
Thetis aids their woe,Melts their strong hearts, and bids their eyes to flow.But
chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighsBurst from his heart, and torrents from
his eyes:His slaughtering hands, yet red with blood, he laidOn his dead friend’s
cold breast, and thus he said:“All hail, Patroclus! let thy honour’d ghostHear,
and rejoice on Pluto’s dreary coast;Behold! Achilles’ promise is complete;The
bloody Hector stretch’d before thy feet.Lo! to the dogs his carcase I resign;And
twelve sad victims, of the Trojan line,Sacred to vengeance, instant shall
expire;Their lives effused around thy funeral pyre.”Gloomy he said, and
(horrible to view)Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw,Prone on the dust.
The Myrmidons aroundUnbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound.All to
Achilles’ sable ship repair,Frequent and full, the genial feast to share.Now
from the well-fed swine black smokes aspire,The bristly victims hissing o’er the
fire:The huge ox bellowing falls; with feebler criesExpires the goat; the sheep
in silence dies.Around the hero’s prostrate body flow’d,In one promiscuous
stream, the reeking blood.And now a band of Argive monarchs bringsThe glorious
victor to the king of kings.From his dead friend the pensive warrior went,With
steps unwilling, to the regal tent.The attending heralds, as by office
bound,With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround:To cleanse his conquering
hands from hostile gore,They urged in vain; the chief refused, and
swore:[282]“No drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!The first and greatest of
the gods above!Till on the pyre I place thee; till I rearThe grassy mound, and
clip thy sacred hair.Some ease at least those pious rites may give,And soothe my
sorrows, while I bear to live.Howe’er, reluctant as I am, I stayAnd share your
feast; but with the dawn of day,(O king of men!) it claims thy royal care,That
Greece the warrior’s funeral pile prepare,And bid the forests fall: (such rites
are paidTo heroes slumbering in eternal shade:)Then, when his earthly part shall
mount in fire,Let the leagued squadrons to their posts retire.”He spoke: they
hear him, and the word obey;The rage of hunger and of thirst allay,Then ease in
sleep the labours of the day.But great Pelides, stretch’d along the shore,Where,
dash’d on rocks, the broken billows roar,Lies inly groaning; while on either
handThe martial Myrmidons confusedly stand.Along the grass his languid members
fall,Tired with his chase around the Trojan wall;Hush’d by the murmurs of the
rolling deep,At length he sinks in the soft arms of sleep.When lo! the shade,
before his closing eyes,Of sad Patroclus rose, or seem’d to rise:In the same
robe he living wore, he came:In stature, voice, and pleasing look, the same.The
form familiar hover’d o’er his head,“And sleeps Achilles? (thus the phantom
said:)Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?Living, I seem’d his dearest,
tenderest care,But now forgot, I wander in the air.Let my pale corse the rites
of burial know,And give me entrance in the realms below:Till then the spirit
finds no resting-place,But here and there the unbodied spectres chaseThe vagrant
dead around the dark abode,Forbid to cross the irremeable flood.Now give thy
hand; for to the farther shoreWhen once we pass, the soul returns no more:When
once the last funereal flames ascend,No more shall meet Achilles and his
friend;No more our thoughts to those we loved make known;Or quit the dearest, to
converse alone.Me fate has sever’d from the sons of earth,The fate fore-doom’d
that waited from my birth:Thee too it waits; before the Trojan wallEven great
and godlike thou art doom’d to fall.Hear then; and as in fate and love we
join,Ah suffer that my bones may rest with thine!Together have we lived;
together bred,One house received us, and one table fed;That golden urn, thy
goddess-mother gave,May mix our ashes in one common grave.”“And is it thou? (he
answers) To my sight[283]Once more return’st thou from the realms of night?O
more than brother! Think each office paid,Whate’er can rest a discontented
shade;But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy!Afford at least that melancholy
joy.”He said, and with his longing arms essay’dIn vain to grasp the visionary
shade!Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,[284]And hears a feeble,
lamentable cry.Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bandsOf golden sleep, and
starting from the sands,Pensive he muses with uplifted hands:“’Tis true, ’tis
certain; man, though dead, retainsPart of himself; the immortal mind remains:The
form subsists without the body’s aid,Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!This
night my friend, so late in battle lost,Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive
ghost:Even now familiar, as in life, he came;Alas! how different! yet how like
the same!”Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears:And now the
rosy-finger’d morn appears,Shows every mournful face with tears o’erspread,And
glares on the pale visage of the dead.But Agamemnon, as the rites demand,With
mules and waggons sends a chosen bandTo load the timber, and the pile to rear;A
charge consign’d to Merion’s faithful care.With proper instruments they take the
road,Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.First march the heavy mules,
securely slow,O’er hills, o’er dales, o’er crags, o’er rocks they
go:[285]Jumping, high o’er the shrubs of the rough ground,Rattle the clattering
cars, and the shock’d axles bound.But when arrived at Ida’s spreading
woods,[286](Fair Ida, water’d with descending floods,)Loud sounds the axe,
redoubling strokes on strokes;On all sides round the forest hurls her
oaksHeadlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown;Then rustling, crackling,
crashing, thunder down.The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;And the
slow mules the same rough road return.The sturdy woodmen equal burdens bore(Such
charge was given them) to the sandy shore;There on the spot which great Achilles
show’d,They eased their shoulders, and disposed the load;Circling around the
place, where times to comeShall view Patroclus’ and Achilles’ tomb.The hero bids
his martial troops appearHigh on their cars in all the pomp of war;Each in
refulgent arms his limbs attires,All mount their chariots, combatants and
squires.The chariots first proceed, a shining train;Then clouds of foot that
smoke along the plain;Next these the melancholy band appear;Amidst, lay dead
Patroclus on the bier;O’er all the corse their scattered locks they
throw;Achilles next, oppress’d with mighty woe,Supporting with his hands the
hero’s head,Bends o’er the extended body of the dead.Patroclus decent on the
appointed groundThey place, and heap the sylvan pile around.But great Achilles
stands apart in prayer,And from his head divides the yellow hair;Those curling
locks which from his youth he vow’d,[287]And sacred grew, to Sperchius’ honour’d
flood:Then sighing, to the deep his locks he cast,And roll’d his eyes around the
watery waste:“Sperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lostDelightful roll along my
native coast!To whom we vainly vow’d, at our return,These locks to fall, and
hecatombs to burn:Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice,Where to the day thy
silver fountains rise,And where in shade of consecrated bowersThy altars stand,
perfumed with native flowers!So vow’d my father, but he vow’d in vain;No more
Achilles sees his native plain;In that vain hope these hairs no longer
grow,Patroclus bears them to the shades below.”Thus o’er Patroclus while the
hero pray’d,On his cold hand the sacred lock he laid.Once more afresh the
Grecian sorrows flow:And now the sun had set upon their woe;But to the king of
men thus spoke the chief:“Enough, Atrides! give the troops relief:Permit the
mourning legions to retire,And let the chiefs alone attend the pyre;The pious
care be ours, the dead to burn—”He said: the people to their ships return:While
those deputed to inter the slainHeap with a rising pyramid the plain.[288]A
hundred foot in length, a hundred wide,The growing structure spreads on every
side;High on the top the manly corse they lay,And well-fed sheep and sable oxen
slay:Achilles covered with their fat the dead,And the piled victims round the
body spread;Then jars of honey, and of fragrant oil,Suspends around, low-bending
o’er the pile.Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groanPour forth their
lives, and on the pyre are thrown.Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board,Fall
two, selected to attend their lord,Then last of all, and horrible to tell,Sad
sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.[289]On these the rage of fire victorious
preys,Involves and joins them in one common blaze.Smear’d with the bloody rites,
he stands on high,And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:[290]“All hail,
Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghostHear, and exult, on Pluto’s dreary coast.Behold
Achilles’ promise fully paid,Twelve Trojan heroes offer’d to thy shade;But
heavier fates on Hector’s corse attend,Saved from the flames, for hungry dogs to
rend.”So spake he, threatening: but the gods made vainHis threat, and guard
inviolate the slain:Celestial Venus hover’d o’er his head,And roseate unguents,
heavenly fragrance! shed:She watch’d him all the night and all the day,And drove
the bloodhounds from their destined prey.Nor sacred Phœbus less employ’d his
care;He pour’d around a veil of gather’d air,And kept the nerves undried, the
flesh entire,Against the solar beam and Sirian fire.[Illustration: ] THE FUNERAL
PILE OF PATROCLUSNor yet the pile, where dead Patroclus lies,Smokes, nor as yet
the sullen flames arise;But, fast beside, Achilles stood in prayer,Invoked the
gods whose spirit moves the air,And victims promised, and libations cast,To
gentle Zephyr and the Boreal blast:He call’d the aerial powers, along the
skiesTo breathe, and whisper to the fires to rise.The winged Iris heard the
hero’s call,And instant hasten’d to their airy hall,Where in old Zephyr’s open
courts on high,Sat all the blustering brethren of the sky.She shone amidst them,
on her painted bow;The rocky pavement glitter’d with the show.All from the
banquet rise, and each invitesThe various goddess to partake the rites.“Not so
(the dame replied), I haste to goTo sacred Ocean, and the floods below:Even now
our solemn hecatombs attend,And heaven is feasting on the world’s green endWith
righteous Ethiops (uncorrupted train!)Far on the extremest limits of the
main.But Peleus’ son entreats, with sacrifice,The western spirit, and the north,
to rise!Let on Patroclus’ pile your blast be driven,And bear the blazing honours
high to heaven.”Swift as the word she vanish’d from their view;Swift as the word
the winds tumultuous flew;Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar,And
heaps on heaps the clouds are toss’d before.To the wide main then stooping from
the skies,The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise:Troy feels the blast along
her shaking walls,Till on the pile the gather’d tempest falls.The structure
crackles in the roaring fires,And all the night the plenteous flame aspires.All
night Achilles hails Patroclus’ soul,With large libations from the golden
bowl.As a poor father, helpless and undone,Mourns o’er the ashes of an only
son,Takes a sad pleasure the last bones to burn,And pours in tears, ere yet they
close the urn:So stay’d Achilles, circling round the shore,So watch’d the
flames, till now they flame no more.’Twas when, emerging through the shades of
night,The morning planet told the approach of light;And, fast behind, Aurora’s
warmer rayO’er the broad ocean pour’d the golden day:Then sank the blaze, the
pile no longer burn’d,And to their caves the whistling winds return’d:Across the
Thracian seas their course they bore;The ruffled seas beneath their passage
roar.Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep,And sank to quiet in the
embrace of sleep,Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowdOf thronging
Grecians round Achilles stood;The tumult waked him: from his eyes he
shookUnwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke:“Ye kings and princes of the
Achaian name!First let us quench the yet remaining flameWith sable wine; then,
as the rites direct,The hero’s bones with careful view select:(Apart, and easy
to be known they lieAmidst the heap, and obvious to the eye:The rest around the
margin will be seenPromiscuous, steeds and immolated men:)These wrapp’d in
double cauls of fat, prepare;And in the golden vase dispose with care;There let
them rest with decent honour laid,Till I shall follow to the infernal
shade.Meantime erect the tomb with pious hands,A common structure on the humble
sands:Hereafter Greece some nobler work may raise,And late posterity record our
praise!”The Greeks obey; where yet the embers glow,Wide o’er the pile the sable
wine they throw,And deep subsides the ashy heap below.Next the white bones his
sad companions place,With tears collected, in the golden vase.The sacred relics
to the tent they bore;The urn a veil of linen covered o’er.That done, they bid
the sepulchre aspire,And cast the deep foundations round the pyre;High in the
midst they heap the swelling bedOf rising earth, memorial of the dead.The
swarming populace the chief detains,And leads amidst a wide extent of
plains;There placed them round: then from the ships proceedsA train of oxen,
mules, and stately steeds,Vases and tripods (for the funeral games),Resplendent
brass, and more resplendent dames.First stood the prizes to reward the forceOf
rapid racers in the dusty course:A woman for the first, in beauty’s
bloom,Skill’d in the needle, and the labouring loom;And a large vase, where two
bright handles rise,Of twenty measures its capacious size.The second victor
claims a mare unbroke,Big with a mule, unknowing of the yoke:The third, a
charger yet untouch’d by flame;Four ample measures held the shining frame:Two
golden talents for the fourth were placed:An ample double bowl contents the
last.These in fair order ranged upon the plain,The hero, rising, thus address’d
the train:“Behold the prizes, valiant Greeks! decreedTo the brave rulers of the
racing steed;Prizes which none beside ourself could gain,Should our immortal
coursers take the plain;(A race unrivall’d, which from ocean’s godPeleus
received, and on his son bestow’d.)But this no time our vigour to display;Nor
suit, with them, the games of this sad day:Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to
deckTheir flowing manes, and sleek their glossy neck.Sad, as they shared in
human grief, they stand,And trail those graceful honours on the sand!Let others
for the noble task prepare,Who trust the courser and the flying car.”Fired at
his word the rival racers rise;But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize,Famed
though Pieria for the fleetest breed,And skill’d to manage the high-bounding
steed.With equal ardour bold Tydides swell’d,The steeds of Tros beneath his yoke
compell’d(Which late obey’d the Dardan chief’s command,When scarce a god
redeem’d him from his hand).Then Menelaus his Podargus brings,And the famed
courser of the king of kings:Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave),To
’scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave,(Æthe her name) at home to end his days;Base
wealth preferring to eternal praise.Next him Antilochus demands the courseWith
beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse.Experienced Nestor gives his son the
reins,Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains;Nor idly warns the hoary
sire, nor hearsThe prudent son with unattending ears.“My son! though youthful
ardour fire thy breast,The gods have loved thee, and with arts have
bless’d;Neptune and Jove on thee conferr’d the skillSwift round the goal to turn
the flying wheel.To guide thy conduct little precept needs;But slow, and past
their vigour, are my steeds.Fear not thy rivals, though for swiftness
known;Compare those rivals’ judgment and thy own:It is not strength, but art,
obtains the prize,And to be swift is less than to be wise.’Tis more by art than
force of numerous strokesThe dexterous woodman shapes the stubborn oaks;By art
the pilot, through the boiling deepAnd howling tempest, steers the fearless
ship;And ’tis the artist wins the glorious course;Not those who trust in
chariots and in horse.In vain, unskilful to the goal they strive,And short, or
wide, the ungovern’d courser drive:While with sure skill, though with inferior
steeds,The knowing racer to his end proceeds;Fix’d on the goal his eye foreruns
the course,His hand unerring steers the steady horse,And now contracts, or now
extends the rein,Observing still the foremost on the plain.Mark then the goal,
’tis easy to be found;Yon aged trunk, a cubit from the ground;Of some once
stately oak the last remains,Or hardy fir, unperish’d with the rains:Inclosed
with stones, conspicuous from afar;And round, a circle for the wheeling
car.(Some tomb perhaps of old, the dead to grace;Or then, as now, the limit of a
race.)Bear close to this, and warily proceed,A little bending to the left-hand
steed;But urge the right, and give him all the reins;While thy strict hand his
fellow’s head restrains,And turns him short; till, doubling as they roll,The
wheel’s round naves appear to brush the goal.Yet (not to break the car, or lame
the horse)Clear of the stony heap direct the course;Lest through incaution
failing, thou mayst beA joy to others, a reproach to me.So shalt thou pass the
goal, secure of mind,And leave unskilful swiftness far behind:Though thy fierce
rival drove the matchless steedWhich bore Adrastus, of celestial breed;Or the
famed race, through all the regions known,That whirl’d the car of proud
Laomedon.”Thus (nought unsaid) the much-advising sageConcludes; then sat, stiff
with unwieldy age.Next bold Meriones was seen to rise,The last, but not least
ardent for the prize.They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose(Roll’d
in his helmet, these Achilles throws).Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus
then;And next the brother of the king of men:Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was
cast;And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.They stand in order, an impatient
train:Pelides points the barrier on the plain,And sends before old Phœnix to the
place,To mark the racers, and to judge the race.At once the coursers from the
barrier bound;The lifted scourges all at once resound;Their heart, their eyes,
their voice, they send before;And up the champaign thunder from the shore:Thick,
where they drive, the dusty clouds arise,And the lost courser in the whirlwind
flies;Loose on their shoulders the long manes reclined,Float in their speed, and
dance upon the wind:The smoking chariots, rapid as they bound,Now seem to touch
the sky, and now the ground.While hot for fame, and conquest all their
care,(Each o’er his flying courser hung in air,)Erect with ardour, poised upon
the rein,They pant, they stretch, they shout along the plain.Now (the last
compass fetch’d around the goal)At the near prize each gathers all his soul,Each
burns with double hope, with double pain,Tears up the shore, and thunders toward
the main.First flew Eumelus on Pheretian steeds;With those of Tros bold Diomed
succeeds:Close on Eumelus’ back they puff the wind,And seem just mounting on his
car behind;Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze,And, hovering o’er, their
stretching shadows sees.Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize;But angry
Phœbus to Tydides flies,Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vainHis
matchless horses’ labour on the plain.Rage fills his eye with anguish, to
surveySnatch’d from his hope the glories of the day.The fraud celestial Pallas
sees with pain,Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again,And fills his
steeds with vigour. At a strokeShe breaks his rival’s chariot from the yoke:No
more their way the startled horses held;The car reversed came rattling on the
field;Shot headlong from his seat, beside the wheel,Prone on the dust the
unhappy master fell;His batter’d face and elbows strike the ground;Nose, mouth,
and front, one undistinguish’d wound:Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his
eyes:Before him far the glad Tydides flies;Minerva’s spirit drives his matchless
pace,And crowns him victor of the labour’d race.The next, though distant,
Menelaus succeeds;While thus young Nestor animates his steeds:“Now, now, my
generous pair, exert your force;Not that we hope to match Tydides’ horse,Since
great Minerva wings their rapid way,And gives their lord the honours of the
day;But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgoYour swiftness? vanquish’d by a
female foe?Through your neglect, if lagging on the plainThe last ignoble gift be
all we gain,No more shall Nestor’s hand your food supply,The old man’s fury
rises, and ye die.Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight,Presents the
occasion, could we use it right.”Thus he. The coursers at their master’s
threatWith quicker steps the sounding champaign beat.And now Antilochus with
nice surveyObserves the compass of the hollow way.’Twas where, by force of
wintry torrents torn,Fast by the road a precipice was worn:Here, where but one
could pass, to shun the throngThe Spartan hero’s chariot smoked along.Close up
the venturous youth resolves to keep,Still edging near, and bears him toward the
steep.Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below,And wonders at the rashness of his
foe.“Hold, stay your steeds—What madness thus to rideThis narrow way! take
larger field (he cried),Or both must fall.”—Atrides cried in vain;He flies more
fast, and throws up all the rein.Far as an able arm the disk can send,When
youthful rivals their full force extend,So far, Antilochus! thy chariot
flewBefore the king: he, cautious, backward drewHis horse compell’d; foreboding
in his fearsThe rattling ruin of the clashing cars,The floundering coursers
rolling on the plain,And conquest lost through frantic haste to gain.But thus
upbraids his rival as he flies:“Go, furious youth! ungenerous and unwise!Go, but
expect not I’ll the prize resign;Add perjury to fraud, and make it thine—”Then
to his steeds with all his force he cries,“Be swift, be vigorous, and regain the
prize!Your rivals, destitute of youthful force,With fainting knees shall labour
in the course,And yield the glory yours.”—The steeds obey;Already at their heels
they wing their way,And seem already to retrieve the day.Meantime the Grecians
in a ring beheldThe coursers bounding o’er the dusty field.The first who mark’d
them was the Cretan king;High on a rising ground, above the ring,The monarch
sat: from whence with sure surveyHe well observed the chief who led the way,And
heard from far his animating cries,And saw the foremost steed with sharpen’d
eyes;On whose broad front a blaze of shining white,Like the full moon, stood
obvious to the sight.He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun:“Are yonder horse
discern’d by me alone?Or can ye, all, another chief survey,And other steeds than
lately led the way?Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld,Lie sure
disabled in the middle field:For, since the goal they doubled, round the plainI
search to find them, but I search in vain.Perchance the reins forsook the
driver’s hand,And, turn’d too short, he tumbled on the strand,Shot from the
chariot; while his coursers strayWith frantic fury from the destined way.Rise
then some other, and inform my sight,For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not
right;Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air,The great Ætolian chief,
renown’d in war.”“Old man! (Oïleus rashly thus replies)Thy tongue too hastily
confers the prize;Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed,Nor youngest,
yet the readiest to decide.Eumelus’ steeds, high bounding in the chase,Still, as
at first, unrivall’d lead the race:I well discern him, as he shakes the rein,And
hear his shouts victorious o’er the plain.”Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed,
rejoin’d:“Barbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!Contentious prince, of all
the Greeks besideThe last in merit, as the first in pride!To vile reproach what
answer can we make?A goblet or a tripod let us stake,And be the king the judge.
The most unwiseWill learn their rashness, when they pay the price.”He said: and
Ajax, by mad passion borne,Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scornTo
fell extremes. But Thetis’ godlike sonAwful amidst them rose, and thus
begun:“Forbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend;Much would ye blame, should
others thus offend:And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end.”No sooner
had he spoke, but thundering near,Drives, through a stream of dust, the
charioteer.High o’er his head the circling lash he wields:His bounding horses
scarcely touch the fields:His car amidst the dusty whirlwind roll’d,Bright with
the mingled blaze of tin and gold,Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could
findThe track his flying wheels had left behind:And the fierce coursers urged
their rapid paceSo swift, it seem’d a flight, and not a race.Now victor at the
goal Tydides stands,Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands;From the
hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream;The well-plied whip is hung athwart the
beam:With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize,The tripod-vase, and dame with
radiant eyes:These to the ships his train triumphant leads,The chief himself
unyokes the panting steeds.Young Nestor follows (who by art, not
force,O’erpass’d Atrides) second in the course.Behind, Atrides urged the race,
more nearThan to the courser in his swift careerThe following car, just touching
with his heelAnd brushing with his tail the whirling wheel:Such, and so narrow
now the space betweenThe rivals, late so distant on the green;So soon swift Æthe
her lost ground regain’d,One length, one moment, had the race obtain’d.Merion
pursued, at greater distance still,With tardier coursers, and inferior
skill.Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy son;Slow dragged the steeds his batter’d
chariot on:Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun:“Behold! the man whose matchless
art surpass’dThe sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last!Fortune denies, but
justice bids us pay(Since great Tydides bears the first away)To him the second
honours of the day.”The Greeks consent with loud-applauding cries,And then
Eumelus had received the prize,But youthful Nestor, jealous of his fame,The
award opposes, and asserts his claim.“Think not (he cries) I tamely will
resign,O Peleus’ son! the mare so justly mine.What if the gods, the skilful to
confound,Have thrown the horse and horseman to the ground?Perhaps he sought not
heaven by sacrifice,And vows omitted forfeited the prize.If yet (distinction to
thy friend to show,And please a soul desirous to bestow)Some gift must grace
Eumelus, view thy storeOf beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shining ore;An ample
present let him thence receive,And Greece shall praise thy generous thirst to
give.But this my prize I never shall forego;This, who but touches, warriors! is
my foe.”Thus spake the youth; nor did his words offend;Pleased with the
well-turn’d flattery of a friend,Achilles smiled: “The gift proposed (he
cried),Antilochus! we shall ourself provide.With plates of brass the corslet
cover’d o’er,(The same renown’d Asteropaeus wore,)Whose glittering margins
raised with silver shine,(No vulgar gift,) Eumelus! shall be thine.”He said:
Automedon at his commandThe corslet brought, and gave it to his
hand.Distinguish’d by his friend, his bosom glowsWith generous joy: then
Menelaus rose;The herald placed the sceptre in his hands,And still’d the clamour
of the shouting bands.Not without cause incensed at Nestor’s son,And inly
grieving, thus the king begun:“The praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain’d,An
act so rash, Antilochus! has stain’d.Robb’d of my glory and my just reward,To
you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared:So not a leader shall our conduct blame,Or
judge me envious of a rival’s fame.But shall not we, ourselves, the truth
maintain?What needs appealing in a fact so plain?What Greek shall blame me, if I
bid thee rise,And vindicate by oath th’ ill-gotten prize?Rise if thou darest,
before thy chariot stand,The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand;And touch
thy steeds, and swear thy whole intentWas but to conquer, not to
circumvent.Swear by that god whose liquid arms surroundThe globe, and whose
dread earthquakes heave the ground!”The prudent chief with calm attention
heard;Then mildly thus: “Excuse, if youth have err’d;Superior as thou art,
forgive the offence,Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense.Thou know’st the
errors of unripen’d age,Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.The prize I
quit, if thou thy wrath resign;The mare, or aught thou ask’st, be freely
thineEre I become (from thy dear friendship torn)Hateful to thee, and to the
gods forsworn.”So spoke Antilochus; and at the wordThe mare contested to the
king restored.Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grainLifts the green ear
above the springing plain,The fields their vegetable life renew,And laugh and
glitter with the morning dew;Such joy the Spartan’s shining face o’erspread,And
lifted his gay heart, while thus he said:“Still may our souls, O generous youth!
agree’Tis now Atrides’ turn to yield to thee.Rash heat perhaps a moment might
control,Not break, the settled temper of thy soul.Not but (my friend) ’tis still
the wiser wayTo waive contention with superior sway;For ah! how few, who should
like thee offend,Like thee, have talents to regain the friend!To plead
indulgence, and thy fault atone,Suffice thy father’s merit and thy own:Generous
alike, for me, the sire and sonHave greatly suffer’d, and have greatly done.I
yield; that all may know, my soul can bend,Nor is my pride preferr’d before my
friend.”He said; and pleased his passion to command,Resign’d the courser to
Noemon’s hand,Friend of the youthful chief: himself content,The shining charger
to his vessel sent.The golden talents Merion next obtain’d;The fifth reward, the
double bowl, remain’d.Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears.And thus the
purpose of his gift declares:“Accept thou this, O sacred sire! (he said)In dear
memorial of Patroclus dead;Dead and for ever lost Patroclus lies,For ever
snatch’d from our desiring eyes!Take thou this token of a grateful heart,Though
’tis not thine to hurl the distant dart,The quoit to toss, the ponderous mace to
wield,Or urge the race, or wrestle on the field:Thy pristine vigour age has
overthrown,But left the glory of the past thy own.”He said, and placed the
goblet at his side;With joy the venerable king replied:“Wisely and well, my son,
thy words have provedA senior honour’d, and a friend beloved!Too true it is,
deserted of my strength,These wither’d arms and limbs have fail’d at length.Oh!
had I now that force I felt of yore,Known through Buprasium and the Pylian
shore!Victorious then in every solemn game,Ordain’d to Amarynces’ mighty
name;The brave Epeians gave my glory way,Ætolians, Pylians, all resign’d the
day.I quell’d Clytomedes in fights of hand,And backward hurl’d Ancæus on the
sand,Surpass’d Iphyclus in the swift career,Phyleus and Polydorus with the
spear.The sons of Actor won the prize of horse,But won by numbers, not by art or
force:For the famed twins, impatient to surveyPrize after prize by Nestor borne
away,Sprung to their car; and with united painsOne lash’d the coursers, while
one ruled the reins.Such once I was! Now to these tasks succeedsA younger race,
that emulate our deeds:I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?)Though once
the foremost hero of the field.Go thou, my son! by generous friendship led,With
martial honours decorate the dead:While pleased I take the gift thy hands
present,(Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent,)Rejoiced, of all the numerous
Greeks, to seeNot one but honours sacred age and me:Those due distinctions thou
so well canst pay,May the just gods return another day!”Proud of the gift, thus
spake the full of days:Achilles heard him, prouder of the praise.The prizes next
are order’d to the field,For the bold champions who the caestus wield.A stately
mule, as yet by toils unbroke,Of six years’ age, unconscious of the yoke,Is to
the circus led, and firmly bound;Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and
round.Achilles rising, thus: “Let Greece exciteTwo heroes equal to this hardy
fight;Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke,And rush beneath the
long-descending stroke.On whom Apollo shall the palm bestow,And whom the Greeks
supreme by conquest know,This mule his dauntless labours shall repay,The
vanquish’d bear the massy bowl away.”This dreadful combat great Epeüs
chose;[291]High o’er the crowd, enormous bulk! he rose,And seized the beast, and
thus began to say:“Stand forth some man, to bear the bowl away!(Price of his
ruin: for who dares denyThis mule my right; the undoubted victor I)Others, ’tis
own’d, in fields of battle shine,But the first honours of this fight are
mine;For who excels in all? Then let my foeDraw near, but first his certain
fortune know;Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,Mash all his bones,
and all his body pound:So let his friends be nigh, a needful train,To heave the
batter’d carcase off the plain.”The giant spoke; and in a stupid gazeThe host
beheld him, silent with amaze!’Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspireTo meet his
might, and emulate thy sire,The great Mecistheus; who in days of yoreIn Theban
games the noblest trophy bore,(The games ordain’d dead OEdipus to grace,)And
singly vanquish the Cadmean race.Him great Tydides urges to contend,Warm with
the hopes of conquest for his friend;Officious with the cincture girds him
round;And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.Amid the circle now each
champion stands,And poises high in air his iron hands;With clashing gauntlets
now they fiercely close,Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows,And painful
sweat from all their members flows.At length Epeus dealt a weighty blowFull on
the cheek of his unwary foe;Beneath that ponderous arm’s resistless swayDown
dropp’d he, nerveless, and extended lay.As a large fish, when winds and waters
roar,By some huge billow dash’d against the shore,Lies panting; not less
batter’d with his wound,The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.To rear his
fallen foe, the victor lends,Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his
friends;Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng,And dragging his
disabled legs along;Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder o’er;His mouth and
nostrils pour the clotted gore;[292]Wrapp’d round in mists he lies, and lost to
thought;His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.The third bold game
Achilles next demands,And calls the wrestlers to the level sands:A massy tripod
for the victor lies,Of twice six oxen its reputed price;And next, the loser’s
spirits to restore,A female captive, valued but at four.Scarce did the chief the
vigorous strife proposeWhen tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.Amid the ring each
nervous rival stands,Embracing rigid with implicit hands.Close lock’d above,
their heads and arms are mix’d:Below, their planted feet at distance fix’d;Like
two strong rafters which the builder forms,Proof to the wintry winds and howling
storms,Their tops connected, but at wider spaceFix’d on the centre stands their
solid base.Now to the grasp each manly body bends;The humid sweat from every
pore descends;Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighsSwell to
each gripe, and bloody tumours rise.Nor could Ulysses, for his art
renown’d,O’erturn the strength of Ajax on the ground;Nor could the strength of
Ajax overthrowThe watchful caution of his artful foe.While the long strife even
tired the lookers on,Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon:“Or let me lift thee,
chief, or lift thou me:Prove we our force, and Jove the rest decree.”He said;
and, straining, heaved him off the groundWith matchless strength; that time
Ulysses foundThe strength to evade, and where the nerves combineHis ankle
struck: the giant fell supine;Ulysses, following, on his bosom lies;Shouts of
applause run rattling through the skies.Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays;He
barely stirr’d him, but he could not raise:His knee lock’d fast, the foe’s
attempt denied;And grappling close, they tumbled side by side.Defiled with
honourable dust they roll,Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul:Again
they rage, again to combat rise;When great Achilles thus divides the prize:“Your
noble vigour, O my friends, restrain;Nor weary out your generous strength in
vain.Ye both have won: let others who excel,Now prove that prowess you have
proved so well.”The hero’s words the willing chiefs obey,From their tired bodies
wipe the dust away,And, clothed anew, the following games survey.And now succeed
the gifts ordain’d to graceThe youths contending in the rapid race:A silver urn
that full six measures held,By none in weight or workmanship excell’d:Sidonian
artists taught the frame to shine,Elaborate, with artifice divine;Whence Tyrian
sailors did the prize transport,And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port:From him
descended, good Eunaeus heir’dThe glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared,To brave
Patroclus gave the rich reward:Now, the same hero’s funeral rites to grace,It
stands the prize of swiftness in the race.A well-fed ox was for the second
placed;And half a talent must content the last.Achilles rising then bespoke the
train:“Who hope the palm of swiftness to obtain,Stand forth, and bear these
prizes from the plain.”The hero said, and starting from his place,Oilean Ajax
rises to the race;Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpass’dHis youthful equals,
Nestor’s son, the last.Ranged in a line the ready racers stand;Pelides points
the barrier with his hand;All start at once; Oïleus led the race;The next
Ulysses, measuring pace with pace;Behind him, diligently close, he sped,As
closely following as the running threadThe spindle follows, and displays the
charmsOf the fair spinster’s breast and moving arms:Graceful in motion thus, his
foe he plies,And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise;His glowing breath
upon his shoulders plays:The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise:To him they
give their wishes, hearts, and eyes,And send their souls before him as he
flies.Now three times turn’d in prospect of the goal,The panting chief to Pallas
lifts his soul:“Assist, O goddess!” thus in thought he pray’d!And present at his
thought descends the maid.Buoy’d by her heavenly force, he seems to swim,And
feels a pinion lifting every limb.All fierce, and ready now the prize to
gain,Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain(O’erturn’d by Pallas), where the
slippery shoreWas clogg’d with slimy dung and mingled gore.(The self-same place
beside Patroclus’ pyre,Where late the slaughter’d victims fed the
fire.)Besmear’d with filth, and blotted o’er with clay,Obscene to sight, the
rueful racer lay;The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared,And left the urn
Ulysses’ rich reward.Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast,The baffled
hero thus the Greeks address’d:“Accursed fate! the conquest I forego;A mortal I,
a goddess was my foe;She urged her favourite on the rapid way,And Pallas, not
Ulysses, won the day.”Thus sourly wail’d he, sputtering dirt and gore;A burst of
laughter echoed through the shore.Antilochus, more humorous than the rest,Takes
the last prize, and takes it with a jest:“Why with our wiser elders should we
strive?The gods still love them, and they always thrive.Ye see, to Ajax I must
yield the prize:He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise;(A green old age
unconscious of decays,That proves the hero born in better days!)Behold his
vigour in this active race!Achilles only boasts a swifter pace:For who can match
Achilles? He who can,Must yet be more than hero, more than man.”The effect
succeeds the speech. Pelides cries,“Thy artful praise deserves a better
prize.Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy friend extoll’d;Receive a talent of the
purest gold.”The youth departs content. The host admireThe son of Nestor, worthy
of his sire.Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings;Cast on the plain,
the brazen burden rings:Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore,And great
Patroclus in short triumph bore.“Stand forth the bravest of our host! (he
cries)Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize,Now grace the lists before our
army’s sight,And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight.Who first the
jointed armour shall explore,And stain his rival’s mail with issuing gore,The
sword Asteropaeus possess’d of old,(A Thracian blade, distinct with studs of
gold,)Shall pay the stroke, and grace the striker’s side:These arms in common
let the chiefs divide:For each brave champion, when the combat ends,A sumptuous
banquet at our tents attends.”Fierce at the word uprose great Tydeus’ son,And
the huge bulk of Ajax Telamon.Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand,The
dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand;Louring they meet, tremendous to the
sight;Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.Opposed in arms not long they
idly stood,But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renew’d.A furious pass
the spear of Ajax madeThrough the broad shield, but at the corslet stay’d.Not
thus the foe: his javelin aim’d aboveThe buckler’s margin, at the neck he
drove.But Greece, now trembling for her hero’s life,Bade share the honours, and
surcease the strife.Yet still the victor’s due Tydides gains,With him the sword
and studded belt remains.Then hurl’d the hero, thundering on the ground,A mass
of iron (an enormous round),Whose weight and size the circling Greeks
admire,Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.This mighty quoit Aëtion
wont to rear,And from his whirling arm dismiss in air;The giant by Achilles
slain, he stow’dAmong his spoils this memorable load.For this, he bids those
nervous artists vie,That teach the disk to sound along the sky.“Let him, whose
might can hurl this bowl, arise;Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize;If
he be one enrich’d with large domainOf downs for flocks, and arable for
grain,Small stock of iron needs that man provide;His hinds and swains whole
years shall be suppliedFrom hence; nor ask the neighbouring city’s aidFor
ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade.”Stern Polypœtes stepp’d before
the throng,And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;Whose force with rival
forces to oppose,Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose.Each stood in order: first
Epeus threw;High o’er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.Leonteus
next a little space surpass’d;And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.O’er
both their marks it flew; till fiercely flungFrom Polypœtes’ arm the discus
sung:Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws,That distant falls among the
grazing cows,So past them all the rapid circle flies:His friends, while loud
applauses shake the skies,With force conjoin’d heave off the weighty
prize.Those, who in skilful archery contend,He next invites the twanging bow to
bend;And twice ten axes casts amidst the round,Ten double-edged, and ten that
singly woundThe mast, which late a first-rate galley bore,The hero fixes in the
sandy shore;To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie,The trembling mark at
which their arrows fly.“Whose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall
bearThese two-edged axes, terrible in war;The single, he whose shaft divides the
cord.”He said: experienced Merion took the word;And skilful Teucer: in the helm
they threwTheir lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.Swift from the string
the sounding arrow flies;But flies unbless’d! No grateful sacrifice,No firstling
lambs, unheedful! didst thou vowTo Phœbus, patron of the shaft and bow.For this,
thy well-aim’d arrow turn’d aside,Err’d from the dove, yet cut the cord that
tied:Adown the mainmast fell the parted string,And the free bird to heaven
displays her wing:Sea, shores, and skies, with loud applause resound,And Merion
eager meditates the wound:He takes the bow, directs the shaft above,And
following with his eye the soaring dove,Implores the god to speed it through the
skies,With vows of firstling lambs, and grateful sacrifice,The dove, in airy
circles as she wheels,Amid the clouds the piercing arrow feels;Quite through and
through the point its passage found,And at his feet fell bloody to the
ground.The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last,With flagging wings
alighted on the mast,A moment hung, and spread her pinions there,Then sudden
dropp’d, and left her life in air.From the pleased crowd new peals of thunder
rise,And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize.To close the funeral games,
Achilles lastA massy spear amid the circle placed,And ample charger of unsullied
frame,With flowers high-wrought, not blacken’d yet by flame.For these he bids
the heroes prove their art,Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.Here
too great Merion hopes the noble prize;Nor here disdain’d the king of men to
rise.With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,Rose to the monarch, and respectful
said:“Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme,O king of nations! all thy
Greeks proclaim;In every martial game thy worth attest,And know thee both their
greatest and their best.Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bearThis beamy
javelin in thy brother’s war.”Pleased from the hero’s lips his praise to
hear,The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:But, set apart for sacred use,
commandsThe glittering charger to Talthybius’ hands.[Illustration: ] CERESBOOK
XXIV.ARGUMENT.THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.The gods deliberate about the
redemption of Hector’s body. Jupitersends Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for
the restoring it, and Iristo Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat
for it. The oldking, notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready
forthe journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He setsforth
in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under thecharge of Idæus the
herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a youngman, and conducts him to the
pavilion of Achilles. Their conversationon the way. Priam finds Achilles at his
table, casts himself at hisfeet, and begs for the body of his son: Achilles,
moved withcompassion, grants his request, detains him one night in his tent,
andthe next morning sends him home with the body: the Trojans run out tomeet
him. The lamentations of Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with thesolemnities of
the funeral. The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of
Hector lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in the truce
allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in Achilles’ camp, and partly in
Troy.Now from the finish’d games the Grecian bandSeek their black ships, and
clear the crowded strand,All stretch’d at ease the genial banquet share,And
pleasing slumbers quiet all their care.Not so Achilles: he, to grief
resign’d,His friend’s dear image present to his mind,Takes his sad couch, more
unobserved to weep;Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep.Restless he
roll’d around his weary bed,And all his soul on his Patroclus fed:The form so
pleasing, and the heart so kind,That youthful vigour, and that manly mind,What
toils they shared, what martial works they wrought,What seas they measured, and
what fields they fought;All pass’d before him in remembrance dear,Thought
follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear.And now supine, now prone, the hero
lay,Now shifts his side, impatient for the day:Then starting up, disconsolate he
goesWide on the lonely beach to vent his woes.There as the solitary mourner
raves,The ruddy morning rises o’er the waves:Soon as it rose, his furious steeds
he join’d!The chariot flies, and Hector trails behind.And thrice, Patroclus!
round thy monumentWas Hector dragg’d, then hurried to the tent.There sleep at
last o’ercomes the hero’s eyes;While foul in dust the unhonour’d carcase
lies,But not deserted by the pitying skies:For Phœbus watch’d it with superior
care,Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air;And, ignominious as it swept
the field,Spread o’er the sacred corse his golden shield.All heaven was moved,
and Hermes will’d to goBy stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe:But
Neptune this, and Pallas this denies,And th’ unrelenting empress of the
skies,E’er since that day implacable to Troy,What time young Paris, simple
shepherd boy,Won by destructive lust (reward obscene),Their charms rejected for
the Cyprian queen.But when the tenth celestial morning broke,To heaven
assembled, thus Apollo spoke:[Illustration: ] HECTOR’S BODY AT THE CAR OF
ACHILLES“Unpitying powers! how oft each holy faneHas Hector tinged with blood of
victims slain?And can ye still his cold remains pursue?Still grudge his body to
the Trojans’ view?Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire,The last sad honours of
a funeral fire?Is then the dire Achilles all your care?That iron heart,
inflexibly severe;A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide,In strength of rage,
and impotence of pride;Who hastes to murder with a savage joy,Invades around,
and breathes but to destroy!Shame is not of his soul; nor understood,The
greatest evil and the greatest good.Still for one loss he rages
unresign’d,Repugnant to the lot of all mankind;To lose a friend, a brother, or a
son,Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done:Awhile they sorrow, then
dismiss their care;Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear.But this
insatiate, the commission givenBy fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of
heaven:Lo, how his rage dishonest drags alongHector’s dead earth, insensible of
wrong!Brave though he be, yet by no reason awed,He violates the laws of man and
god.”[Illustration: ] THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS“If equal honours by the partial
skiesAre doom’d both heroes, (Juno thus replies,)If Thetis’ son must no
distinction know,Then hear, ye gods! the patron of the bow.But Hector only
boasts a mortal claim,His birth deriving from a mortal dame:Achilles, of your
own ethereal race,Springs from a goddess by a man’s embrace(A goddess by ourself
to Peleus given,A man divine, and chosen friend of heaven)To grace those
nuptials, from the bright abodeYourselves were present; where this
minstrel-god,Well pleased to share the feast, amid the quireStood proud to hymn,
and tune his youthful lyre.”Then thus the Thunderer checks the imperial
dame:“Let not thy wrath the court of heaven inflame;Their merits, nor their
honours, are the same.But mine, and every god’s peculiar graceHector deserves,
of all the Trojan race:Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay,(The only
honours men to gods can pay,)Nor ever from our smoking altar ceasedThe pure
libation, and the holy feast:Howe’er by stealth to snatch the corse away,We will
not: Thetis guards it night and day.But haste, and summon to our courts aboveThe
azure queen; let her persuasion moveHer furious son from Priam to receiveThe
proffer’d ransom, and the corse to leave.”He added not: and Iris from the
skies,Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies,Meteorous the face of ocean
sweeps,Refulgent gliding o’er the sable deeps.Between where Samos wide his
forests spreads,And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads,Down plunged the maid;
(the parted waves resound;)She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.As
bearing death in the fallacious bait,From the bent angle sinks the leaden
weight;So pass’d the goddess through the closing wave,Where Thetis sorrow’d in
her secret cave:There placed amidst her melancholy train(The blue-hair’d sisters
of the sacred main)Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come,And wept her godlike
son’s approaching doom.Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:“Arise, O
Thetis! from thy seats below,’Tis Jove that calls.”—“And why (the dame
replies)Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies?Sad object as I am for heavenly
sight!Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!Howe’er, be heaven’s almighty sire
obey’d—”She spake, and veil’d her head in sable shade,Which, flowing long, her
graceful person clad;And forth she paced, majestically sad.Then through the
world of waters they repair(The way fair Iris led) to upper air.The deeps
dividing, o’er the coast they rise,And touch with momentary flight the
skies.There in the lightning’s blaze the sire they found,And all the gods in
shining synod round.Thetis approach’d with anguish in her face,(Minerva rising,
gave the mourner place,)Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,And offer’d from
her hand the nectar-bowl:She tasted, and resign’d it: then beganThe sacred sire
of gods and mortal man:“Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief
o’ercast;Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!Suffice, we know and we
partake thy cares;But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares.Nine days are
past since all the court aboveIn Hector’s cause have moved the ear of Jove;’Twas
voted, Hermes from his godlike foeBy stealth should bear him, but we will’d not
so:We will, thy son himself the corse restore,And to his conquest add this glory
more.Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear:Tell him he tempts the wrath of
heaven too far;Nor let him more (our anger if he dread)Vent his mad vengeance on
the sacred dead;But yield to ransom and the father’s prayer;The mournful father,
Iris shall prepareWith gifts to sue; and offer to his handsWhate’er his honour
asks, or heart demands.”His word the silver-footed queen attends,And from
Olympus’ snowy tops descends.Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament,And
echoing groans that shook the lofty tent:His friends prepare the victim, and
disposeRepast unheeded, while he vents his woes;The goddess seats her by her
pensive son,She press’d his hand, and tender thus begun:“How long, unhappy!
shall thy sorrows flow,And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe:Mindless of
food, or love, whose pleasing reignSoothes weary life, and softens human pain?O
snatch the moments yet within thy power;Not long to live, indulge the amorous
hour!Lo! Jove himself (for Jove’s command I bear)Forbids to tempt the wrath of
heaven too far.No longer then (his fury if thou dread)Detain the relics of great
Hector dead;Nor vent on senseless earth thy vengeance vain,But yield to ransom,
and restore the slain.”To whom Achilles: “Be the ransom given,And we submit,
since such the will of heaven.”While thus they communed, from the Olympian
bowersJove orders Iris to the Trojan towers:“Haste, winged goddess! to the
sacred town,And urge her monarch to redeem his son.Alone the Ilian ramparts let
him leave,And bear what stern Achilles may receive:Alone, for so we will; no
Trojan nearExcept, to place the dead with decent care,Some aged herald, who with
gentle handMay the slow mules and funeral car command.Nor let him death, nor let
him danger dread,Safe through the foe by our protection led:Him Hermes to
Achilles shall convey,Guard of his life, and partner of his way.Fierce as he is,
Achilles’ self shall spareHis age, nor touch one venerable hair:Some thought
there must be in a soul so brave,Some sense of duty, some desire to
save.”[Illustration: ] IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTORThen down
her bow the winged Iris drives,And swift at Priam’s mournful court arrives:Where
the sad sons beside their father’s throneSat bathed in tears, and answer’d groan
with groan.And all amidst them lay the hoary sire,(Sad scene of woe!) his face
his wrapp’d attireConceal’d from sight; with frantic hands he spreadA shower of
ashes o’er his neck and head.From room to room his pensive daughters roam;Whose
shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome;Mindful of those, who late their
pride and joy,Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!Before the king
Jove’s messenger appears,And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears:“Fear
not, O father! no ill news I bear;From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his
care;For Hector’s sake these walls he bids thee leave,And bear what stern
Achilles may receive;Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near,Except, to place the
dead with decent care,Some aged herald, who with gentle handMay the slow mules
and funeral car command.Nor shalt thou death, nor shalt thou danger dread:Safe
through the foe by his protection led:Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey,Guard
of thy life, and partner of thy way.Fierce as he is, Achilles’ self shall
spareThy age, nor touch one venerable hair;Some thought there must be in a soul
so brave,Some sense of duty, some desire to save.”She spoke, and vanish’d. Priam
bids prepareHis gentle mules and harness to the car;There, for the gifts, a
polish’d casket lay:His pious sons the king’s command obey.Then pass’d the
monarch to his bridal-room,Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume,And where
the treasures of his empire lay;Then call’d his queen, and thus began to
say:“Unhappy consort of a king distress’d!Partake the troubles of thy husband’s
breast:I saw descend the messenger of Jove,Who bids me try Achilles’ mind to
move;Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtainThe corse of Hector, at yon
navy slain.Tell me thy thought: my heart impels to goThrough hostile camps, and
bears me to the foe.”The hoary monarch thus. Her piercing criesSad Hecuba
renews, and then replies:“Ah! whither wanders thy distemper’d mind?And where the
prudence now that awed mankind?Through Phrygia once and foreign regions
known;Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!Singly to pass through hosts of
foes! to face(O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race!To view that deathful
eye, and wander o’erThose hands yet red with Hector’s noble gore!Alas! my lord!
he knows not how to spare,And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare;So brave!
so many fallen! To claim his rageVain were thy dignity, and vain thy age.No—pent
in this sad palace, let us giveTo grief the wretched days we have to live.Still,
still for Hector let our sorrows flow,Born to his own, and to his parents’
woe!Doom’d from the hour his luckless life begun,To dogs, to vultures, and to
Peleus’ son!Oh! in his dearest blood might I allayMy rage, and these barbarities
repay!For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breathExpired not meanly, in
unactive death?He poured his latest blood in manly fight,And fell a hero in his
country’s right.”“Seek not to stay me, nor my soul affrightWith words of omen,
like a bird of night,(Replied unmoved the venerable man;)’Tis heaven commands
me, and you urge in vain.Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,Nor augur,
priest, nor seer, had been obey’d.A present goddess brought the high command,I
saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.I go, ye gods! obedient to your
call:If in yon camp your powers have doom’d my fall,Content—By the same hand let
me expire!Add to the slaughter’d son the wretched sire!One cold embrace at least
may be allow’d,And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!”From forth his
open’d stores, this said, he drewTwelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,As many
vests, as many mantles told,And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with
gold,Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,With ten pure talents from
the richest mine;And last a large well-labour’d bowl had place,(The pledge of
treaties once with friendly Thrace:)Seem’d all too mean the stores he could
employ,For one last look to buy him back to Troy!Lo! the sad father, frantic
with his pain,Around him furious drives his menial train:In vain each slave with
duteous care attends,Each office hurts him, and each face offends.“What make ye
here, officious crowds! (he cries):Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my
eyes.Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:Am I the only object of
despair?Am I become my people’s common show,Set up by Jove your spectacle of
woe?No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;The same stern god to ruin
gives you all:Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;Your sole defence, your
guardian power is gone!I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown,I see the
ruins of your smoking town!O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come,A
willing ghost to Pluto’s dreary dome!”He said, and feebly drives his friends
away:The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.Next on his sons his erring
fury falls,Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls;His threats Deiphobus and Dius
hear,Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer,And generous Antiphon: for yet these
nineSurvived, sad relics of his numerous line.“Inglorious sons of an unhappy
sire!Why did not all in Hector’s cause expire?Wretch that I am! my bravest
offspring slain.You, the disgrace of Priam’s house, remain!Mestor the brave,
renown’d in ranks of war,With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,[293]And last
great Hector, more than man divine,For sure he seem’d not of terrestrial
line!All those relentless Mars untimely slew,And left me these, a soft and
servile crew,Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ,Gluttons and
flatterers, the contempt of Troy!Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run,And
speed my journey to redeem my son?”The sons their father’s wretched age
revere,Forgive his anger, and produce the car.High on the seat the cabinet they
bind:The new-made car with solid beauty shined;Box was the yoke, emboss’d with
costly pains,And hung with ringlets to receive the reins;Nine cubits long, the
traces swept the ground:These to the chariot’s polish’d pole they bound.Then
fix’d a ring the running reins to guide,And close beneath the gather’d ends were
tied.Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain)The sad attendants load the
groaning wain:Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring,(The gift of
Mysia to the Trojan king.)But the fair horses, long his darling care,Himself
received, and harness’d to his car:Grieved as he was, he not this task
denied;The hoary herald help’d him, at his side.While careful these the gentle
coursers join’d,Sad Hecuba approach’d with anxious mind;A golden bowl that
foam’d with fragrant wine,(Libation destined to the power divine,)Held in her
right, before the steed she stands,And thus consigns it to the monarch’s
hands:“Take this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harmsHis grace restore thee
to our roof and arms.Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine,Heaven, or
thy soul, inspires this bold design;Pray to that god, who high on Ida’s
browSurveys thy desolated realms below,His winged messenger to send from
high,And lead thy way with heavenly augury:Let the strong sovereign of the plumy
raceTower on the right of yon ethereal space.That sign beheld, and strengthen’d
from above,Boldly pursue the journey mark’d by Jove:But if the god his augury
denies,Suppress thy impulse, nor reject advice.”“’Tis just (said Priam) to the
sire aboveTo raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?”He spoke, and bade the
attendant handmaid bringThe purest water of the living spring:(Her ready hands
the ewer and bason held:)Then took the golden cup his queen had fill’d;On the
mid pavement pours the rosy wine,Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine:“O
first and greatest! heaven’s imperial lord!On lofty Ida’s holy hill adored!To
stern Achilles now direct my ways,And teach him mercy when a father prays.If
such thy will, despatch from yonder skyThy sacred bird, celestial augury!Let the
strong sovereign of the plumy raceTower on the right of yon ethereal space;So
shall thy suppliant, strengthen’d from above,Fearless pursue the journey mark’d
by Jove.”Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high,Despatch’d his bird,
celestial augury!The swift-wing’d chaser of the feather’d game,And known to gods
by Percnos’ lofty name.Wide as appears some palace-gate display’d,So broad, his
pinions stretch’d their ample shade,As stooping dexter with resounding wingsThe
imperial bird descends in airy rings.A dawn of joy in every face appears:The
mourning matron dries her timorous tears:Swift on his car the impatient monarch
sprung;The brazen portal in his passage rung;The mules preceding draw the loaded
wain,Charged with the gifts: Idæus holds the rein:The king himself his gentle
steeds controls,And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls.On his slow
wheels the following people wait,Mourn at each step, and give him up to
fate;With hands uplifted eye him as he pass’d,And gaze upon him as they gazed
their last.Now forward fares the father on his way,Through the lone fields, and
back to Ilion they.Great Jove beheld him as he cross’d the plain,And felt the
woes of miserable man.Then thus to Hermes: “Thou whose constant caresStill
succour mortals, and attend their prayers;Behold an object to thy charge
consign’d:If ever pity touch’d thee for mankind,Go, guard the sire: the
observing foe prevent,And safe conduct him to Achilles’ tent.”The god obeys, his
golden pinions binds,[294]And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,That high,
through fields of air, his flight sustain,O’er the wide earth, and o’er the
boundless main;Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,Or in soft slumbers
seals the wakeful eye:Thus arm’d, swift Hermes steers his airy way,And stoops on
Hellespont’s resounding sea.A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,He seem’d;
fair offspring of some princely line!Now twilight veil’d the glaring face of
day,And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;What time the herald and the hoary
king(Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,That circling Ilus’ ancient
marble flows)Allow’d their mules and steeds a short repose,Through the dim shade
the herald first espiesA man’s approach, and thus to Priam cries:“I mark some
foe’s advance: O king! beware;This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!For
much I fear destruction hovers nigh:Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?Or
old and helpless, at his feet to fall,Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy
call?”The afflicted monarch shiver’d with despair;Pale grew his face, and
upright stood his hair;Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came;A sudden
trembling shook his aged frame:When Hermes, greeting, touch’d his royal
hand,And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand:“Say whither, father! when each
mortal sightIs seal’d in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?Why roam thy
mules and steeds the plains along,Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so
strong?What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view;These, who with
endless hate thy race pursue?For what defence, alas! could’st thou
provide;Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?Yet suffer not thy soul to
sink with dread;From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head;From Greece I’ll
guard thee too; for in those linesThe living image of my father shines.”“Thy
words, that speak benevolence of mind,Are true, my son! (the godlike sire
rejoin’d:)Great are my hazards; but the gods surveyMy steps, and send thee,
guardian of my way.Hail, and be bless’d! For scarce of mortal kindAppear thy
form, thy feature, and thy mind.”“Nor true are all thy words, nor erring
wide;(The sacred messenger of heaven replied;)But say, convey’st thou through
the lonely plainsWhat yet most precious of thy store remains,To lodge in safety
with some friendly hand:Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land?Or fliest
thou now?—What hopes can Troy retain,Thy matchless son, her guard and glory,
slain?”The king, alarm’d: “Say what, and whence thou artWho search the sorrows
of a parent’s heart,And know so well how godlike Hector died?”Thus Priam spoke,
and Hermes thus replied:“You tempt me, father, and with pity touch:On this sad
subject you inquire too much.Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector view’dIn
glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued:I saw him when, like Jove, his flames
he toss’dOn thousand ships, and wither’d half a host:I saw, but help’d not:
stern Achilles’ ireForbade assistance, and enjoy’d the fire.For him I serve, of
Myrmidonian race;One ship convey’d us from our native place;Polyctor is my sire,
an honour’d name,Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame;Of seven his sons, by
whom the lot was castTo serve our prince, it fell on me, the last.To watch this
quarter, my adventure falls:For with the morn the Greeks attack your
walls;Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage,And scarce their rulers check
their martial rage.”“If then thou art of stern Pelides’ train,(The mournful
monarch thus rejoin’d again,)Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laidMy son’s
dear relics? what befalls him dead?Have dogs dismember’d (on the naked
plains),Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?”“O favour’d of the skies! (thus
answered thenThe power that mediates between god and men)Nor dogs nor vultures
have thy Hector rent,But whole he lies, neglected in the tent:This the twelfth
evening since he rested there,Untouch’d by worms, untainted by the air.Still as
Aurora’s ruddy beam is spread,Round his friend’s tomb Achilles drags the
dead:Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face,All fresh he lies, with every living
grace,Majestical in death! No stains are foundO’er all the corse, and closed is
every wound,Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care,Some hand divine,
preserves him ever fair:Or all the host of heaven, to whom he ledA life so
grateful, still regard him dead.”Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide,And
joyful thus the royal sire replied:“Blest is the man who pays the gods aboveThe
constant tribute of respect and love!Those who inhabit the Olympian bowerMy son
forgot not, in exalted power;And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind,Even to
the ashes of the just is kind.But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take,A
pledge of gratitude for Hector’s sake;And while the favouring gods our steps
survey,Safe to Pelides’ tent conduct my way.”To whom the latent god: “O king,
forbearTo tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err.But can I, absent from my
prince’s sight,Take gifts in secret, that must shun the light?What from our
master’s interest thus we draw,Is but a licensed theft that ’scapes the
law.Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence;And as the crime, I dread the
consequence.Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey;Guard of thy life, and
partner of thy way:On thee attend, thy safety to maintain,O’er pathless forests,
or the roaring main.”He said, then took the chariot at a bound,And snatch’d the
reins, and whirl’d the lash around:Before the inspiring god that urged them
on,The coursers fly with spirit not their own.And now they reach’d the naval
walls, and foundThe guards repasting, while the bowls go round;On these the
virtue of his wand he tries,And pours deep slumber on their watchful eyes:Then
heaved the massy gates, removed the bars,And o’er the trenches led the rolling
cars.Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went,And now approach’d Pelides’
lofty tent.On firs the roof was raised, and cover’d o’erWith reeds collected
from the marshy shore;And, fenced with palisades, a hall of state,(The work of
soldiers,) where the hero sat:Large was the door, whose well-compacted strengthA
solid pine-tree barr’d of wondrous length:Scarce three strong Greeks could lift
its mighty weight,But great Achilles singly closed the gate.This Hermes (such
the power of gods) set wide;Then swift alighted the celestial guide,And thus
reveal’d—”Hear, prince! and understandThou ow’st thy guidance to no mortal
hand:Hermes I am, descended from above,The king of arts, the messenger of
Jove,Farewell: to shun Achilles’ sight I fly;Uncommon are such favours of the
sky,Nor stand confess’d to frail mortality.Now fearless enter, and prefer thy
prayers;Adjure him by his father’s silver hairs,His son, his mother! urge him to
bestowWhatever pity that stern heart can know.”Thus having said, he vanish’d
from his eyes,And in a moment shot into the skies:The king, confirm’d from
heaven, alighted there,And left his aged herald on the car,With solemn pace
through various rooms he went,And found Achilles in his inner tent:There sat the
hero: Alcimus the brave,And great Automedon, attendance gave:These served his
person at the royal feast;Around, at awful distance, stood the rest.Unseen by
these, the king his entry made:And, prostrate now before Achilles laid,Sudden (a
venerable sight!) appears;Embraced his knees, and bathed his hands in
tears;Those direful hands his kisses press’d, embruedEven with the best, the
dearest of his blood!As when a wretch (who, conscious of his crime,Pursued for
murder, flies his native clime)Just gains some frontier, breathless, pale,
amazed,All gaze, all wonder: thus Achilles gazed:Thus stood the attendants
stupid with surprise:All mute, yet seem’d to question with their eyes:Each
look’d on other, none the silence broke,Till thus at last the kingly suppliant
spoke:“Ah think, thou favour’d of the powers divine![295]Think of thy father’s
age, and pity mine!In me that father’s reverend image trace,Those silver hairs,
that venerable face;His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see!In all my
equal, but in misery!Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fateExpels him
helpless from his peaceful state;Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him
fly,And beg protection with a feeble cry.Yet still one comfort in his soul may
rise;He hears his son still lives to glad his eyes,And, hearing, still may hope
a better dayMay send him thee, to chase that foe away.No comfort to my griefs,
no hopes remain,The best, the bravest, of my sons are slain!Yet what a race! ere
Greece to Ilion came,The pledge of many a loved and loving dame:Nineteen one
mother bore—Dead, all are dead!How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled!Still one
was left their loss to recompense;His father’s hope, his country’s last
defence.Him too thy rage has slain! beneath thy steel,Unhappy in his country’s
cause he fell!“For him through hostile camps I bent my way,For him thus
prostrate at thy feet I lay;Large gifts proportion’d to thy wrath I bear;O hear
the wretched, and the gods revere!“Think of thy father, and this face behold!See
him in me, as helpless and as old!Though not so wretched: there he yields to
me,The first of men in sovereign misery!Thus forced to kneel, thus grovelling to
embraceThe scourge and ruin of my realm and race;Suppliant my children’s
murderer to implore,And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore!”These
words soft pity in the chief inspire,Touch’d with the dear remembrance of his
sire.Then with his hand (as prostrate still he lay)The old man’s cheek he gently
turn’d away.Now each by turns indulged the gush of woe;And now the mingled tides
together flow:This low on earth, that gently bending o’er;A father one, and one
a son deplore:But great Achilles different passions rend,And now his sire he
mourns, and now his friend.The infectious softness through the heroes ran;One
universal solemn shower began;They bore as heroes, but they felt as man.Satiate
at length with unavailing woes,From the high throne divine Achilles rose;The
reverend monarch by the hand he raised;On his white beard and form majestic
gazed,Not unrelenting; then serene beganWith words to soothe the miserable
man:“Alas, what weight of anguish hast thou known,Unhappy prince! thus guardless
and aloneTo pass through foes, and thus undaunted faceThe man whose fury has
destroy’d thy race!Heaven sure has arm’d thee with a heart of steel,A strength
proportion’d to the woes you feel.Rise, then: let reason mitigate your care:To
mourn avails not: man is born to bear.Such is, alas! the gods’ severe
decree:They, only they are blest, and only free.Two urns by Jove’s high throne
have ever stood,The source of evil one, and one of good;From thence the cup of
mortal man he fills,Blessings to these, to those distributes ill;To most he
mingles both: the wretch decreedTo taste the bad unmix’d, is cursed
indeed;Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,He wanders, outcast both of
earth and heaven.The happiest taste not happiness sincere;But find the cordial
draught is dash’d with care.Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and powerWhat
stars concurring bless’d his natal hour!A realm, a goddess, to his wishes
given;Graced by the gods with all the gifts of heaven.One evil yet o’ertakes his
latest day:No race succeeding to imperial sway;An only son; and he, alas!
ordain’dTo fall untimely in a foreign land.See him, in Troy, the pious care
declineOf his weak age, to live the curse of thine!Thou too, old man, hast
happier days beheld;In riches once, in children once excell’d;Extended Phrygia
own’d thy ample reign,And all fair Lesbos’ blissful seats contain,And all wide
Hellespont’s unmeasured main.But since the god his hand has pleased to turn,And
fill thy measure from his bitter urn,What sees the sun, but hapless heroes’
falls?War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!What must be, must be. Bear
thy lot, nor shedThese unavailing sorrows o’er the dead;Thou canst not call him
from the Stygian shore,But thou, alas! may’st live to suffer more!”To whom the
king: “O favour’d of the skies!Here let me grow to earth! since Hector liesOn
the bare beach deprived of obsequies.O give me Hector! to my eyes restoreHis
corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more.Thou, as thou may’st, these boundless
stores enjoy;Safe may’st thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy;So shall thy
pity and forbearance giveA weak old man to see the light and live!”“Move me no
more, (Achilles thus replies,While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes,)Nor seek
by tears my steady soul to bend:To yield thy Hector I myself intend:For know,
from Jove my goddess-mother came,(Old Ocean’s daughter, silver-footed dame,)Nor
comest thou but by heaven; nor comest alone,Some god impels with courage not thy
own:No human hand the weighty gates unbarr’d,Nor could the boldest of our youth
have daredTo pass our outworks, or elude the guard.Cease; lest, neglectful of
high Jove’s command,I show thee, king! thou tread’st on hostile land;Release my
knees, thy suppliant arts give o’er,And shake the purpose of my soul no
more.”The sire obey’d him, trembling and o’eraw’d.Achilles, like a lion, rush’d
abroad:Automedon and Alcimus attend,(Whom most he honour’d, since he lost his
friend,)These to unyoke the mules and horses went,And led the hoary herald to
the tent;Next, heap’d on high, the numerous presents bear,(Great Hector’s
ransom,) from the polish’d car.Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread,They
leave: to cover and enwrap the dead.Then call the handmaids, with assistant
toilTo wash the body and anoint with oil,Apart from Priam: lest the unhappy
sire,Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ireThe stern Pelides; and nor
sacred age,Nor Jove’s command, should check the rising rage.This done, the
garments o’er the corse they spread;Achilles lifts it to the funeral bed:Then,
while the body on the car they laid,He groans, and calls on loved Patroclus’
shade:“If, in that gloom which never light must know,The deeds of mortals touch
the ghosts below,O friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfil(Restoring Hector)
heaven’s unquestion’d will.The gifts the father gave, be ever thine,To grace thy
manes, and adorn thy shrine.”[296]He said, and, entering, took his seat of
state;Where full before him reverend Priam sate;To whom, composed, the godlike
chief begun:“Lo! to thy prayer restored, thy breathless son;Extended on the
funeral couch he lies;And soon as morning paints the eastern skies,The sight is
granted to thy longing eyes:But now the peaceful hours of sacred nightDemand
reflection, and to rest invite:Nor thou, O father! thus consumed with woe,The
common cares that nourish life forego.Not thus did Niobe, of form divine,A
parent once, whose sorrows equall’d thine:Six youthful sons, as many blooming
maids,In one sad day beheld the Stygian shades;Those by Apollo’s silver bow were
slain,These, Cynthia’s arrows stretch’d upon the plain:So was her pride
chastised by wrath divine,Who match’d her own with bright Latona’s line;But two
the goddess, twelve the queen enjoy’d;Those boasted twelve, the avenging two
destroy’d.Steep’d in their blood, and in the dust outspread,Nine days,
neglected, lay exposed the dead;None by to weep them, to inhume them none;(For
Jove had turn’d the nation all to stone.)The gods themselves, at length
relenting gaveThe unhappy race the honours of a grave.Herself a rock (for such
was heaven’s high will)Through deserts wild now pours a weeping rill;Where round
the bed whence Achelous springs,The watery fairies dance in mazy rings;There
high on Sipylus’s shaggy brow,She stands, her own sad monument of woe;The rock
for ever lasts, the tears for ever flow.“Such griefs, O king! have other parents
known;Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.The care of heaven thy Hector has
appear’d,Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterr’d;Soon may thy aged cheeks in
tears be drown’d,And all the eyes of Ilion stream around.”He said, and, rising,
chose the victim eweWith silver fleece, which his attendants slew.The limbs they
sever from the reeking hide,With skill prepare them, and in parts divide:Each on
the coals the separate morsels lays,And, hasty, snatches from the rising
blaze.With bread the glittering canisters they load,Which round the board
Automedon bestow’d.The chief himself to each his portion placed,And each
indulging shared in sweet repast.When now the rage of hunger was repress’d,The
wondering hero eyes his royal guest:No less the royal guest the hero eyes,His
godlike aspect and majestic size;Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage;And
there, the mild benevolence of age.Thus gazing long, the silence neither
broke,(A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke:“Permit me now, beloved of
Jove! to steepMy careful temples in the dew of sleep:For, since the day that
number’d with the deadMy hapless son, the dust has been my bed;Soft sleep a
stranger to my weeping eyes;My only food, my sorrows and my sighs!Till now,
encouraged by the grace you give,I share thy banquet, and consent to live.”With
that, Achilles bade prepare the bed,With purple soft and shaggy carpets
spread;Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way,And place the couches,
and the coverings lay.Then he: “Now, father, sleep, but sleep not here;Consult
thy safety, and forgive my fear,Lest any Argive, at this hour awake,To ask our
counsel, or our orders take,Approaching sudden to our open’d tent,Perchance
behold thee, and our grace prevent.Should such report thy honour’d person
here,The king of men the ransom might defer;But say with speed, if aught of thy
desireRemains unask’d; what time the rites requireTo inter thy Hector? For, so
long we stayOur slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey.”“If then thy will
permit (the monarch said)To finish all due honours to the dead,This of thy grace
accord: to thee are knownThe fears of Ilion, closed within her town;And at what
distance from our walls aspireThe hills of Ide, and forests for the fire.Nine
days to vent our sorrows I request,The tenth shall see the funeral and the
feast;The next, to raise his monument be given;The twelfth we war, if war be
doom’d by heaven!”“This thy request (replied the chief) enjoy:Till then our arms
suspend the fall of Troy.”Then gave his hand at parting, to preventThe old man’s
fears, and turn’d within the tent;Where fair Briseïs, bright in blooming
charms,Expects her hero with desiring arms.But in the porch the king and herald
rest;Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast.Now gods and men the gifts
of sleep partake;Industrious Hermes only was awake,The king’s return revolving
in his mind,To pass the ramparts, and the watch to blind.The power descending
hover’d o’er his head:“And sleep’st thou, father! (thus the vision said:)Now
dost thou sleep, when Hector is restored?Nor fear the Grecian foes, or Grecian
lord?Thy presence here should stern Atrides see,Thy still surviving sons may sue
for thee;May offer all thy treasures yet contain,To spare thy age; and offer all
in vain.”Waked with the word the trembling sire arose,And raised his friend: the
god before him goes:He joins the mules, directs them with his hand,And moves in
silence through the hostile land.When now to Xanthus’ yellow stream they
drove,(Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove,)The winged deity forsook their
view,And in a moment to Olympus flew.Now shed Aurora round her saffron
ray,Sprang through the gates of light, and gave the day:Charged with the
mournful load, to Ilion goThe sage and king, majestically slow.Cassandra first
beholds, from Ilion’s spire,The sad procession of her hoary sire;Then, as the
pensive pomp advanced more near,(Her breathless brother stretched upon the
bier,)A shower of tears o’erflows her beauteous eyes,Alarming thus all Ilion
with her cries:“Turn here your steps, and here your eyes employ,Ye wretched
daughters, and ye sons of Troy!If e’er ye rush’d in crowds, with vast delight,To
hail your hero glorious from the fight,Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows
flow;Your common triumph, and your common woe.”In thronging crowds they issue to
the plains;Nor man nor woman in the walls remains;In every face the self-same
grief is shown;And Troy sends forth one universal groan.At Scæa’s gates they
meet the mourning wain,Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.The wife
and mother, frantic with despair,Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scatter’d
hair:Thus wildly wailing, at the gates they lay;And there had sigh’d and
sorrow’d out the day;But godlike Priam from the chariot rose:“Forbear (he cried)
this violence of woes;First to the palace let the car proceed,Then pour your
boundless sorrows o’er the dead.”The waves of people at his word divide,Slow
rolls the chariot through the following tide;Even to the palace the sad pomp
they wait:They weep, and place him on the bed of state.A melancholy choir attend
around,With plaintive sighs, and music’s solemn sound:Alternately they sing,
alternate flowThe obedient tears, melodious in their woe.While deeper sorrows
groan from each full heart,And nature speaks at every pause of art.First to the
corse the weeping consort flew;Around his neck her milk-white arms she
threw,“And oh, my Hector! Oh, my lord! (she cries)Snatch’d in thy bloom from
these desiring eyes!Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!And I abandon’d,
desolate, alone!An only son, once comfort of our pains,Sad product now of
hapless love, remains!Never to manly age that son shall rise,Or with increasing
graces glad my eyes:For Ilion now (her great defender slain)Shall sink a smoking
ruin on the plain.Who now protects her wives with guardian care?Who saves her
infants from the rage of war?Now hostile fleets must waft those infants
o’er(Those wives must wait them) to a foreign shore:Thou too, my son, to
barbarous climes shall go,The sad companion of thy mother’s woe;Driven hence a
slave before the victor’s swordCondemn’d to toil for some inhuman lord:Or else
some Greek whose father press’d the plain,Or son, or brother, by great Hector
slain,In Hector’s blood his vengeance shall enjoy,And hurl thee headlong from
the towers of Troy.[297]For thy stern father never spared a foe:Thence all these
tears, and all this scene of woe!Thence many evils his sad parents bore,His
parents many, but his consort more.Why gav’st thou not to me thy dying hand?And
why received not I thy last command?Some word thou would’st have spoke, which,
sadly dear,My soul might keep, or utter with a tear;Which never, never could be
lost in air,Fix’d in my heart, and oft repeated there!”Thus to her weeping maids
she makes her moan,Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan.The mournful
mother next sustains her part:“O thou, the best, the dearest to my heart!Of all
my race thou most by heaven approved,And by the immortals even in death
beloved!While all my other sons in barbarous bandsAchilles bound, and sold to
foreign lands,This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost,Free, and a hero,
to the Stygian coast.Sentenced, ’tis true, by his inhuman doom,Thy noble corse
was dragg’d around the tomb;(The tomb of him thy warlike arm had
slain;)Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain!Yet glow’st thou fresh with every
living grace;No mark of pain, or violence of face:Rosy and fair! as Phœbus’
silver bowDismiss’d thee gently to the shades below.”Thus spoke the dame, and
melted into tears.Sad Helen next in pomp of grief appears;Fast from the shining
sluices of her eyesFall the round crystal drops, while thus she cries.“Ah,
dearest friend! in whom the gods had join’d[298]The mildest manners with the
bravest mind,Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are o’erSince Paris brought me
to the Trojan shore,(O had I perish’d, ere that form divineSeduced this soft,
this easy heart of mine!)Yet was it ne’er my fate, from thee to findA deed
ungentle, or a word unkind.When others cursed the authoress of their woe,Thy
pity check’d my sorrows in their flow.If some proud brother eyed me with
disdain,Or scornful sister with her sweeping train,Thy gentle accents soften’d
all my pain.For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee,The wretched source of
all this misery.The fate I caused, for ever I bemoan;Sad Helen has no friend,
now thou art gone!Through Troy’s wide streets abandon’d shall I roam!In Troy
deserted, as abhorr’d at home!”So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming
eye.Distressful beauty melts each stander-by.On all around the infectious sorrow
grows;But Priam check’d the torrent as it rose:“Perform, ye Trojans! what the
rites require,And fell the forests for a funeral pyre;Twelve days, nor foes nor
secret ambush dread;Achilles grants these honours to the
dead.”[299][Illustration: ] FUNERAL OF HECTORHe spoke, and, at his word, the
Trojan trainTheir mules and oxen harness to the wain,Pour through the gates, and
fell’d from Ida’s crown,Roll back the gather’d forests to the town.These toils
continue nine succeeding days,And high in air a sylvan structure raise.But when
the tenth fair morn began to shine,Forth to the pile was borne the man
divine,And placed aloft; while all, with streaming eyes,Beheld the flames and
rolling smokes arise.Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,With rosy lustre
streak’d the dewy lawn,Again the mournful crowds surround the pyre,And quench
with wine the yet remaining fire.The snowy bones his friends and brothers
place(With tears collected) in a golden vase;The golden vase in purple palls
they roll’d,Of softest texture, and inwrought with gold.Last o’er the urn the
sacred earth they spread,And raised the tomb, memorial of the dead.(Strong
guards and spies, till all the rites were done,Watch’d from the rising to the
setting sun.)All Troy then moves to Priam’s court again,A solemn, silent,
melancholy train:Assembled there, from pious toil they rest,And sadly shared the
last sepulchral feast.Such honours Ilion to her hero paid,And peaceful slept the
mighty Hector’s shade.[300]CONCLUDING NOTE.We have now passed through the Iliad,
and seen the anger of Achilles,and the terrible effects of it, at an end: as
that only was the subjectof the poem, and the nature of epic poetry would not
permit our authorto proceed to the event of the war, it perhaps may be
acceptable to thecommon reader to give a short account of what happened to Troy
and thechief actors in this poem after the conclusion of it.I need not mention
that Troy was taken soon after the death of Hectorby the stratagem of the wooden
horse, the particulars of which aredescribed by Virgil in the second book of the
Æneid.Achilles fell before Troy, by the hand of Paris, by the shot of anarrow in
his heel, as Hector had prophesied at his death, lib. xxii.The unfortunate Priam
was killed by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.Ajax, after the death of Achilles,
had a contest with Ulysses for thearmour of Vulcan, but being defeated in his
aim, he slew himselfthrough indignation.Helen, after the death of Paris, married
Deiphobus his brother, and atthe taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to
reconcile herself toMenelaus her first husband, who received her again into
favour.Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murdered by Ægysthus, at
theinstigation of Clytemnestra his wife, who in his absence haddishonoured his
bed with Ægysthus.Diomed, after the fall of Troy, was expelled his own country,
andscarce escaped with his life from his adulterous wife Ægialé; but atlast was
received by Daunus in Apulia, and shared his kingdom; it isuncertain how he
died.Nestor lived in peace with his children, in Pylos, his native
country.Ulysses also, after innumerable troubles by sea and land, at
lastreturned in safety to Ithaca, which is the subject of Homer’s Odyssey.For
what remains, I beg to be excused from the ceremonies of takingleave at the end
of my work, and from embarrassing myself, or others,with any defences or
apologies about it. But instead of endeavouring toraise a vain monument to
myself, of the merits or difficulties of it(which must be left to the world, to
truth, and to posterity), let meleave behind me a memorial of my friendship with
one of the mostvaluable of men, as well as finest writers, of my age and
country, onewho has tried, and knows by his own experience, how hard an
undertakingit is to do justice to Homer, and one whom (I am sure)
sincerelyrejoices with me at the period of my labours. To him, therefore,
havingbrought this long work to a conclusion, I desire to dedicate it, and
tohave the honour and satisfaction of placing together, in this manner,the names
of Mr. CONGREVE, and ofMarch 25, 1720A. POPETon theon de eupoiia—to mae epi
pleon me procophai en poiaetiki kaiallois epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a
kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautaneuodos proionta.M. AUREL ANTON _de Seipso_,
lib. i. § 17.END OF THE ILIADFootnotes [1] “What,” says Archdeacon Wilberforce,
“is the natural root of loyalty as distinguished from such mere selfish desire
of personal security as is apt to take its place in civilized times, but that
consciousness of a natural bond among the families of men which gives a
fellow-feeling to whole clans and nations, and thus enlists their affections in
behalf of those time-honoured representatives of their ancient blood, in whose
success they feel a personal interest? Hence the delight when we recognize an
act of nobility or justice in our hereditary princes“‘Tuque prior, tu parce
genus qui ducis Olympo,Projice tela manu _sanguis meus_’“So strong is this
feeling, that it regains an engrafted influence evenwhen history witnesses that
vast convulsions have rent and weakened itand the Celtic feeling towards the
Stuarts has been rekindled in ourown days towards the granddaughter of George
the Third of Hanover. “Somewhat similar may be seen in the disposition to
idolize those great lawgivers of man’s race, who have given expression, in the
immortal language of song, to the deeper inspirations of our nature. The
thoughts of Homer or of Shakespere are the universal inheritance of the human
race. In this mutual ground every man meets his brother, they have been set
forth by the providence of God to vindicate for all of us what nature could
effect, and that, in these representatives of our race, we might recognize our
common benefactors.’—_Doctrine of the Incarnation_, pp. 9, 10. [2] Εἰκος δέ μιν
ἦν καὶ μνημόσυνα πάντων γράφεσθαι. Vit. Hom. in Schweigh. Herodot. t. iv. p.
299, sq. § 6. I may observe that this Life has been paraphrased in English by my
learned young friend Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie, and appended to my prose
translation of the Odyssey. The present abridgement however, will contain all
that is of use to the reader, for the biographical value of the treatise is most
insignificant. [3] _I.e._ both of composing and reciting verses for as Blair
observes, “The first poets sang their own verses.” Sextus Empir. adv. Mus. p.
360 ed. Fabric. Οὐ ἀμελει γέ τοι καὶ οἰ ποιηταὶ μελοποιοὶ λέγονται, καὶ τὰ
Ὁμήρου ἕπη τὸ πάλαι πρὸς λύραν ἤδετο. “The voice,” observes Heeren, “was always
accompanied by some instrument. The bard was provided with a harp on which he
played a prelude, to elevate and inspire his mind, and with which he accompanied
the song when begun. His voice probably preserved a medium between singing and
recitation; the words, and not the melody were regarded by the listeners, hence
it was necessary for him to remain intelligible to all. In countries where
nothing similar is found, it is difficult to represent such scenes to the mind;
but whoever has had an opportunity of listening to the improvisation of Italy,
can easily form an idea of Demodocus and Phemius.”—_Ancient Greece_, p. 94. [4]
“Should it not be, since _my_ arrival? asks Mackenzie, observing that “poplars
can hardly live so long”. But setting aside the fact that we must not expect
consistency in a mere romance, the ancients had a superstitious belief in the
great age of trees which grew near places consecrated by the presence of gods
and great men. See Cicero de Legg II I, sub init., where he speaks of the plane
tree under which Socrates used to walk and of the tree at Delos, where Latona
gave birth to Apollo. This passage is referred to by Stephanus of Byzantium, _s.
v._ N. T. p. 490, ed. de Pinedo. I omit quoting any of the dull epigrams
ascribed to Homer for, as Mr. Justice Talfourd rightly observes, “The
authenticity of these fragments depends upon that of the pseudo Herodotean Life
of Homer, from which they are taken.” Lit of Greece, pp. 38 in Encycl. Metrop.
Cf. Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 317. [5] It is quoted as the work of Cleobulus,
by Diogenes Laert. Vit. Cleob. p. 62, ed. Casaub. [6] I trust I am justified in
employing this as an equivalent for the Greek λέσχαι. [7] Ὡς εἰ τοὺς Ὁμήρους
δόξει τρέφειν αὐτοῖς, ὅμιλον πολλόν τε και ἀχρεοῖν ἕξουσιν. ἐι τεῦθεν δὲ και
τοὔνομα Ὁμηρος ἐπεκράτησε τῷ Μελησιγενεῖ ἀπὸ τῆς συμφορης. οἱ γὰρ Κυμαῖοι τοὺς
τυφλοὺς Ὁμήρους λέγουσιν. Vit. Hom. _l. c._ p. 311. The etymology has been
condemned by recent scholars. See Welcker, Epische Cyclus, p. 127, and
Mackenzie’s note, p. xiv. [8] Θεστορίδης, θνητοῖσιν ἀνωἷστων πολεών περ, οὐδὲν
ἀφραστότερον πέλεται νόου ἀνθρώποισιν. Ibid. p. 315. During his stay at Phocœa,
Homer is said to have composed the Little Iliad, and the Phocœid. See Muller’s
Hist. of Lit., vi. § 3. Welcker, _l. c._ pp. 132, 272, 358, sqq., and Mure, Gr.
Lit. vol. ii. p. 284, sq. [9] This is so pretty a picture of early manners and
hospitality, that it is almost a pity to find that it is obviously a copy from
the Odyssey. See the fourteenth book. In fact, whoever was the author of this
fictitious biography, he showed some tact in identifying Homer with certain
events described in his poems, and in eliciting from them the germs of something
like a personal narrative. [10] Διὰ λόγων ἐστιῶντο. A common metaphor. So Plato
calls the parties conversing δαιτύμονες, or ἐστιάτορες, Tim. i. p. 522 A. Cf.
Themist. Orat. vi. p. 168, and xvi. p. 374, ed. Petav. So διηγήμασι σοφοῖς ὁμοῦ
καὶ τερπνοῖς ἡδίω τὴν θοινην τοῖς ἑστιωμένοις ἐποίει, Choricius in Fabric. Bibl.
Gr. T. viii. P. 851. λόγοις γὰρ ἑστίᾳ, Athenæus vii p 275, A. [11] It was at
Bolissus, and in the house of this Chian citizen, that Homer is said to have
written the Batrachomyomachia, or Battle of the Frogs and Mice, the
Epicichlidia, and some other minor works. [12] Chandler, Travels, vol. i. p. 61,
referred to in the Voyage Pittoresque dans la Grèce, vol. i. P. 92, where a view
of the spot is given of which the author candidly says,— “Je ne puis répondre
d’une exactitude scrupuleuse dans la vue générale que j’en donne, car étant allé
seul pour l’examiner je perdis mon crayon, et je fus obligé de m’en fier à ma
mémoire. Je ne crois cependant pas avoir trop à me plaindre d’elle en cette
occasion.” [13] A more probable reason for this companionship, and for the
character of Mentor itself, is given by the allegorists, viz.: the assumption of
Mentor’s form by the guardian deity of the wise Ulysses, Minerva. The classical
reader may compare Plutarch, Opp. t. ii. p. 880; _Xyland_. Heraclid. Pont.
Alleg. Hom. p. 531-5, of Gale’s Opusc. Mythol. Dionys. Halic. de Hom. Poes. c.
15; Apul. de Deo Socrat. s. f. [14] Vit. Hom. § 28. [15] The riddle is given in
Section 35. Compare Mackenzie’s note, p. xxx. [16] Heeren’s Ancient Greece, p.
96. [17] Compare Sir E. L. Bulwer’s Caxtons v. i. p. 4. [18] Pericles and
Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p. 387. [19] Quarterly Review, No.
lxxxvii., p. 147. [20] Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the
translation of which I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286.“Origias,
farewell! and oh! remember meHereafter, when some stranger from the sea,A
hapless wanderer, may your isle explore,And ask you, maid, of all the bards you
boast,Who sings the sweetest, and delights you mostOh! answer all,—‘A blind old
man and poorSweetest he sings—and dwells on Chios’ rocky shore.’”_See_ Thucyd.
iii, 104. [21] Longin., de Sublim., ix. § 26. Ὅθεν ἐν τῇ Ὀδυσσείᾳ παρεικάσαι τις
ἂν καταδυομένῳ τὸν Ὅμηρον ἡλίῳ, οδ δίχα τῆς σφοδρότητος παραμένει το μέγεθος.
[22] See Tatian, quoted in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. v. II t. ii. Mr. Mackenzie has
given three brief but elaborate papers on the different writers on the subject,
which deserve to be consulted. See Notes and Queries, vol. v. pp. 99, 171, and
221. His own views are moderate, and perhaps as satisfactory, on the whole, as
any of the hypotheses hitherto put forth. In fact, they consist in an attempt to
blend those hypotheses into something like consistency, rather than in
advocating any individual theory. [23] Letters to Phileleuth; Lips. [24] Hist.
of Greece, vol. ii. p. 191, sqq. [25] It is, indeed not easy to calculate the
height to which the memory may be cultivated. To take an ordinary case, we might
refer to that of any first rate actor, who must be prepared, at a very short
warning, to ‘rhapsodize,’ night after night, parts which when laid together,
would amount to an immense number of lines. But all this is nothing to two
instances of our own day. Visiting at Naples a gentleman of the highest
intellectual attainments, and who held a distinguished rank among the men of
letters in the last century, he informed us that the day before he had passed
much time in examining a man, not highly educated, who had learned to repeat the
whole Gierusalemme of Tasso, not only to recite it consecutively, but also to
repeat those stanzas in utter defiance of the sense, either forwards or
backwards, or from the eighth line to the first, alternately the odd and even
lines—in short, whatever the passage required; the memory, which seemed to cling
to the words much more than to the sense, had it at such perfect command, that
it could produce it under any form. Our informant went on to state that this
singular being was proceeding to learn the Orlando Furioso in the same manner.
But even this instance is less wonderful than one as to which we may appeal to
any of our readers that happened some twenty years ago to visit the town of
Stirling, in Scotland. No such person can have forgotten the poor, uneducated
man Blind Jamie who could actually repeat, after a few minutes consideration any
verse required from any part of the Bible—even the obscurest and most
unimportant enumeration of mere proper names not excepted. We do not mention
these facts as touching the more difficult part of the question before us, but
facts they are; and if we find so much difficulty in calculating the extent to
which the mere memory may be cultivated, are we, in these days of multifarious
reading, and of countless distracting affairs, fair judges of the perfection to
which the invention and the memory combined may attain in a simpler age, and
among a more single minded people?—Quarterly Review, _l. c._, p. 143, sqq.
Heeren steers between the two opinions, observing that, “The Dschungariade of
the Calmucks is said to surpass the poems of Homer in length, as much as it
stands beneath them in merit, and yet it exists only in the memory of a people
which is not unacquainted with writing. But the songs of a nation are probably
the last things which are committed to writing, for the very reason that they
are remembered.”— _Ancient Greece_. p. 100. [26] Vol. II p. 198, sqq. [27]
Quarterly Review, _l. c._, p. 131 sq. [28] Betrachtungen über die Ilias. Berol.
1841. See Grote, p. 204. Notes and Queries, vol. v. p. 221. [29] Prolegg. pp.
xxxii., xxxvi., &c. [30] Vol. ii. p. 214 sqq. [31] “Who,” says Cicero, de Orat.
iii. 34, “was more learned in that age, or whose eloquence is reported to have
been more perfected by literature than that of Peisistratus, who is said first
to have disposed the books of Homer in the order in which we now have them?”
Compare Wolf’s Prolegomena 33, §. [32] “The first book, together with the
eighth, and the books from the eleventh to the twenty-second inclusive, seems to
form the primary organization of the poem, then properly an Achilleïs.”—Grote,
vol. ii. p. 235 [33] K. R. H. Mackenzie, Notes and Queries, p. 222 sqq. [34] See
his Epistle to Raphelingius, in Schroeder’s edition, 4to., Delphis, 1728. [35]
Ancient Greece, p. 101. [36] The best description of this monument will be found
in Vaux’s “Antiquities of the British Museum,” p. 198 sq. The monument itself
(Towneley Sculptures, No. 123) is well known. [37] Coleridge, Classic Poets, p.
276. [38] Preface to her Homer. [39] Hesiod. Opp. et Dier. Lib. I. vers. 155,
&c. [40] The following argument of the Iliad, corrected in a few particulars, is
translated from Bitaubé, and is, perhaps, the neatest summary that has ever been
drawn up:—“A hero, injured by his general, and animated with a noble resentment,
retires to his tent; and for a season withdraws himself and his troops from the
war. During this interval, victory abandons the army, which for nine years has
been occupied in a great enterprise, upon the successful termination of which
the honour of their country depends. The general, at length opening his eyes to
the fault which he had committed, deputes the principal officers of his army to
the incensed hero, with commission to make compensation for the injury, and to
tender magnificent presents. The hero, according to the proud obstinacy of his
character, persists in his animosity; the army is again defeated, and is on the
verge of entire destruction. This inexorable man has a friend; this friend weeps
before him, and asks for the hero’s arms, and for permission to go to the war in
his stead. The eloquence of friendship prevails more than the intercession of
the ambassadors or the gifts of the general. He lends his armour to his friend,
but commands him not to engage with the chief of the enemy’s army, because he
reserves to himself the honour of that combat, and because he also fears for his
friend’s life. The prohibition is forgotten; the friend listens to nothing but
his courage; his corpse is brought back to the hero, and the hero’s arms become
the prize of the conqueror. Then the hero, given up to the most lively despair,
prepares to fight; he receives from a divinity new armour, is reconciled with
his general and, thirsting for glory and revenge, enacts prodigies of valour,
recovers the victory, slays the enemy’s chief, honours his friend with superb
funeral rites, and exercises a cruel vengeance on the body of his destroyer; but
finally appeased by the tears and prayers of the father of the slain warrior,
restores to the old man the corpse of his son, which he buries with due
solemnities.’—Coleridge, p. 177, sqq. [41] Vultures: Pope is more accurate than
the poet he translates, for Homer writes “a prey to dogs and to _all_ kinds of
birds. But all kinds of birds are not carnivorous. [42] _i.e._ during the whole
time of their striving the will of Jove was being gradually accomplished. [43]
Compare Milton’s “Paradise Lost” i. 6“Sing, heavenly Muse, that on the secret
topOf Horeb, or of Sinai, didst inspireThat shepherd.” [44] _Latona’s son: i.e._
Apollo. [45] _King of men:_ Agamemnon. [46] _Brother kings:_ Menelaus and
Agamemnon. [47] _Smintheus_ an epithet taken from sminthos, the Phrygian name
for a _mouse_, was applied to Apollo for having put an end to a plague of mice
which had harassed that territory. Strabo, however, says, that when the Teucri
were migrating from Crete, they were told by an oracle to settle in that place,
where they should not be attacked by the original inhabitants of the land, and
that, having halted for the night, a number of field-mice came and gnawed away
the leathern straps of their baggage, and thongs of their armour. In fulfilment
of the oracle, they settled on the spot, and raised a temple to Sminthean
Apollo. Grote, “History of Greece,” i. p. 68, remarks that the “worship of
Sminthean Apollo, in various parts of the Troad and its neighboring territory,
dates before the earliest period of Æolian colonization.” [48] _Cilla_, a town
of Troas near Thebe, so called from Cillus, a sister of Hippodamia, slain by
Œnomaus. [49] A mistake. It should be,“If e’er I roofed thy graceful fane,”for
the custom of decorating temples with garlands was of later date. [50] _Bent was
his bow_ “The Apollo of Homer, it must be borne in mind, is a different
character from the deity of the same name in the later classical pantheon.
Throughout both poems, all deaths from unforeseen or invisible causes, the
ravages of pestilence, the fate of the young child or promising adult, cut off
in the germ of infancy or flower of youth, of the old man dropping peacefully
into the grave, or of the reckless sinner suddenly checked in his career of
crime, are ascribed to the arrows of Apollo or Diana. The oracular functions of
the god rose naturally out of the above fundamental attributes, for who could
more appropriately impart to mortals what little foreknowledge Fate permitted of
her decrees than the agent of her most awful dispensations? The close union of
the arts of prophecy and song explains his additional office of god of music,
while the arrows with which he and his sister were armed, symbols of sudden
death in every age, no less naturally procured him that of god of archery. Of
any connection between Apollo and the Sun, whatever may have existed in the more
esoteric doctrine of the Greek sanctuaries, there is no trace in either Iliad or
Odyssey.”—Mure, “History of Greek Literature,” vol. i. p. 478, sq. [51] It has
frequently been observed, that most pestilences begin with animals, and that
Homer had this fact in mind. [52] _Convened to council_. The public assembly in
the heroic times is well characterized by Grote, vol. ii. p 92. “It is an
assembly for talk. Communication and discussion to a certain extent by the
chiefs in person, of the people as listeners and sympathizers—often for
eloquence, and sometimes for quarrel—but here its ostensible purposes end.” [53]
Old Jacob Duport, whose “Gnomologia Homerica” is full of curious and useful
things, quotes several passages of the ancients, in which reference is made to
these words of Homer, in maintenance of the belief that dreams had a divine
origin and an import in which men were interested. [54] Rather, “bright-eyed.”
See the German critics quoted by Arnold. [55] The prize given to Ajax was
Tecmessa, while Ulysses received Laodice, the daughter of Cycnus. [56] The
Myrmidons dwelt on the southern borders of Thessaly, and took their origin from
Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. It is fancifully supposed that the name
was derived from myrmaex, an _ant_, “because they imitated the diligence of the
ants, and like them were indefatigable, continually employed in cultivating the
earth; the change from ants to men is founded merely on the equivocation of
their name, which resembles that of the ant: they bore a further resemblance to
these little animals, in that instead of inhabiting towns or villages, at first
they commonly resided in the open fields, having no other retreats but dens and
the cavities of trees, until Ithacus brought them together, and settled them in
more secure and comfortable habitations.”—Anthon’s “Lempriere.” [57] Eustathius,
after Heraclides Ponticus and others, allegorizes this apparition, as if the
appearance of Minerva to Achilles, unseen by the rest, was intended to point out
the sudden recollection that he would gain nothing by intemperate wrath, and
that it were best to restrain his anger, and only gratify it by withdrawing his
services. The same idea is rather cleverly worked out by Apuleius, “De Deo
Socratis.” [58] Compare Milton, “Paradise Lost,” bk. ii:“Though his
tongueDropp’d manna.”So Proverbs v. 3, “For the lips of a strange woman drop as
anhoney-comb.” [59] Salt water was chiefly used in lustrations, from its being
supposed to possess certain fiery particles. Hence, if sea-water could not be
obtained, salt was thrown into the fresh water to be used for the lustration.
Menander, in Clem. Alex. vii. p.713, hydati perriranai, embalon alas, phakois.
[60] The persons of heralds were held inviolable, and they were at liberty to
travel whither they would without fear of molestation. Pollux, Onom. viii. p.
159. The office was generally given to old men, and they were believed to be
under the especial protection of Jove and Mercury. [61] His mother, Thetis, the
daughter of Nereus and Doris, who was courted by Neptune and Jupiter. When,
however, it was known that the son to whom she would give birth must prove
greater than his father, it was determined to wed her to a mortal, and Peleus,
with great difficulty, succeeded in obtaining her hand, as she eluded him by
assuming various forms. Her children were all destroyed by fire through her
attempts to see whether they were immortal, and Achilles would have shared the
same fate had not his father rescued him. She afterwards rendered him
invulnerable by plunging him into the waters of the Styx, with the exception of
that part of the heel by which she held him. Hygin. Fab. 54 [62] Thebé was a
city of Mysia, north of Adramyttium. [63] That is, defrauds me of the prize
allotted me by their votes. [64] Quintus Calaber goes still further in his
account of the service rendered to Jove by Thetis:“Nay more, the fetters of
Almighty JoveShe loosed”—Dyce’s “Calaber,” s. 58. [65] _To Fates averse_. Of the
gloomy destiny reigning throughout the Homeric poems, and from which even the
gods are not exempt, Schlegel well observes, “This power extends also to the
world of gods— for the Grecian gods are mere powers of nature—and although
immeasurably higher than mortal man, yet, compared with infinitude, they are on
an equal footing with himself.”—‘Lectures on the Drama’ v. p. 67. [66] It has
been observed that the annual procession of the sacred ship so often represented
on Egyptian monuments, and the return of the deity from Ethiopia after some
days’ absence, serves to show the Ethiopian origin of Thebes, and of the worship
of Jupiter Ammon. “I think,” says Heeren, after quoting a passage from Diodorus
about the holy ship, “that this procession is represented in one of the great
sculptured reliefs on the temple of Karnak. The sacred ship of Ammon is on the
shore with its whole equipment, and is towed along by another boat. It is
therefore on its voyage. This must have been one of the most celebrated
festivals, since, even according to the interpretation of antiquity, Homer
alludes to it when he speaks of Jupiter’s visit to the Ethiopians, and his
twelve days’ absence.”—Long, “Egyptian Antiquities” vol. 1 p. 96. Eustathius,
vol. 1 p. 98, sq. (ed. Basil) gives this interpretation, and likewise an
allegorical one, which we will spare the reader. [67] _Atoned_, i.e. reconciled.
This is the proper and most natural meaning of the word, as may be seen from
Taylor’s remarks in Calmet’s Dictionary, p.110, of my edition. [68] That is,
drawing back their necks while they cut their throats. “If the sacrifice was in
honour of the celestial gods, the throat was bent upwards towards heaven; but if
made to the heroes, or infernal deities, it was killed with its throat toward
the ground.”— “Elgin Marbles,” vol i. p.81.“The jolly crew, unmindful of the
past,The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste,Some strip the skin; some
portion out the spoil;The limbs yet trembling, in the caldrons boil;Some on the
fire the reeking entrails broil.Stretch’d on the grassy turf, at ease they
dine,Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with wine.”Dryden’s
“Virgil,” i. 293. [69] _Crown’d, i.e._ filled to the brim. The custom of
adorning goblets with flowers was of later date. [70] _He spoke_, &c. “When a
friend inquired of Phidias what pattern he had formed his Olympian Jupiter, he
is said to have answered by repeating the lines of the first Iliad in which the
poet represents the majesty of the god in the most sublime terms; thereby
signifying that the genius of Homer had inspired him with it. Those who beheld
this statue are said to have been so struck with it as to have asked whether
Jupiter had descended from heaven to show himself to Phidias, or whether Phidias
had been carried thither to contemplate the god.”— “Elgin Marbles,” vol. xii
p.124. [71] “So was his willPronounced among the gods, and by an oath,That shook
heav’n’s whole circumference, confirm’d.”“Paradise Lost” ii. 351. [72] _A double
bowl, i.e._ a vessel with a cup at both ends, something like the measures by
which a halfpenny or pennyworth of nuts is sold. See Buttmann, Lexic. p. 93 sq.
[73] “Paradise Lost,” i. 44.“Him th’ Almighty powerHurl’d headlong flaming from
th ethereal sky,With hideous ruin and combustion” [74] The occasion on which
Vulcan incurred Jove’s displeasure was this—After Hercules, had taken and
pillaged Troy, Juno raised a storm, which drove him to the island of Cos, having
previously cast Jove into a sleep, to prevent him aiding his son. Jove, in
revenge, fastened iron anvils to her feet, and hung her from the sky, and
Vulcan, attempting to relieve her, was kicked down from Olympus in the manner
described. The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep explanations for this
amusing fiction. See Heraclides, “Ponticus,” p. 463 sq., ed Gale. The story is
told by Homer himself in Book xv. The Sinthians were a race of robbers, the
ancient inhabitants of Lemnos which island was ever after sacred to Vulcan.“Nor
was his name unheard or unadoredIn ancient Greece, and in Ausonian landMen
call’d him Mulciber, and how he fellFrom heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry
JoveSheer o’er the crystal battlements from mornTo noon he fell, from noon to
dewy eve,A summer’s day and with the setting sunDropp’d from the zenith like a
falling starOn Lemnos, th’ Aegean isle thus they relate.”“Paradise Lost,” i. 738
[75] It is ingeniously observed by Grote, vol i p. 463, that “The gods formed a
sort of political community of their own which had its hierarchy, its
distribution of ranks and duties, its contentions for power and occasional
revolutions, its public meetings in the agora of Olympus, and its multitudinous
banquets or festivals.” [76] Plato, Rep. iii. p. 437, was so scandalized at this
deception of Jupiter’s, and at his other attacks on the character of the gods,
that he would fain sentence him to an honourable banishment. (See Minucius
Felix, Section 22.) Coleridge, Introd. p. 154, well observes, that the supreme
father of gods and men had a full right to employ a lying spirit to work out his
ultimate will. Compare “Paradise Lost,” v. 646:“And roseate dews disposedAll but
the unsleeping eyes of God to rest.” [77] —_Dream_ ought to be spelt with a
capital letter, being, I think, evidently personified as the god of dreams. See
Anthon and others.“When, by Minerva sent, a _fraudful_ DreamRush’d from the
skies, the bane of her and Troy.”Dyce’s “Select Translations from Quintus
Calaber,” p.10. [78] “Sleep’st thou, companion dear, what sleep can closeThy
eye-lids?”—“Paradise Lost,” v. 673. [79] This truly military sentiment has been
echoed by the approving voice of many a general and statesman of antiquity. See
Pliny’s Panegyric on Trajan. Silius neatly translates it,“Turpe duci totam somno
consumere noctem.” [80] _The same in habit_, &c.“To whom once more the winged
god appears;His former youthful mien and shape he wears.”Dryden’s Virgil, iv.
803. [81] “As bees in spring-time, whenThe sun with Taurus rides,Pour forth
their populous youth about the hiveIn clusters; they among fresh dews and
flowersFly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,The suburb of this straw-built
citadel,New-nibb’d with balm, expatiate and conferTheir state affairs. So thick
the very crowdSwarm’d and were straiten’d.”—“Paradise Lost” i. 768. [82] It was
the herald’s duty to make the people sit down. “A _standing_ agora is a symptom
of manifest terror (II. Xviii. 246) an evening agora, to which men came elevated
by wine, is also the forerunner of mischief (‘Odyssey,’ iii. 138).”—Grote, ii.
p. 91, _note_. [83] This sceptre, like that of Judah (Genesis xlix. 10), is a
type of the supreme and far-spread dominion of the house of the Atrides. See
Thucydides i. 9. “It is traced through the hands of Hermes, he being the wealth
giving god, whose blessing is most efficacious in furthering the process of
acquisition.”—Grote, i. p. 212. Compare Quintus Calaber (Dyce’s Selections, p.
43).“Thus the monarch spoke,Then pledged the chief in a capacious cup,Golden,
and framed by art divine (a giftWhich to Almighty Jove lame Vulcan broughtUpon
his nuptial day, when he espousedThe Queen of Love), the sire of gods
bestow’dThe cup on Dardanus, who gave it nextTo Ericthonius Tros received it
then,And left it, with his wealth, to be possess’dBy Ilus he to great
LaomedonGave it, and last to Priam’s lot it fell.” [84] Grote, i, p. 393, states
the number of the Grecian forces at upwards of 100,000 men. Nichols makes a
total of 135,000. [85] “As thick as when a fieldOf Ceres, ripe for harvest,
waving bendsHis bearded grove of ears, which way the windSways them.”—Paradise
Lost,” iv. 980, sqq. [86] This sentiment used to be a popular one with some of
the greatest tyrants, who abused it into a pretext for unlimited usurpation of
power. Dion, Caligula, and Domitian were particularly fond of it, and, in an
extended form, we find the maxim propounded by Creon in the Antigone of
Sophocles. See some important remarks of Heeren, “Ancient Greece,” ch. vi. p.
105. [87] It may be remarked, that the character of Thersites, revolting and
contemptible as it is, serves admirably to develop the disposition of Ulysses in
a new light, in which mere cunning is less prominent. Of the gradual and
individual development of Homer’s heroes, Schlegel well observes, “In bas-relief
the figures are usually in profile, and in the epos all are characterized in the
simplest manner in relief; they are not grouped together, but follow one
another; so Homer’s heroes advance, one by one, in succession before us. It has
been remarked that the _Iliad_ is not definitively closed, but that we are left
to suppose something both to precede and to follow it. The bas-relief is equally
without limit, and may be continued _ad infinitum_, either from before or
behind, on which account the ancients preferred for it such subjects as admitted
of an indefinite extension, sacrificial processions, dances, and lines of
combatants, and hence they also exhibit bas-reliefs on curved surfaces, such as
vases, or the frieze of a rotunda, where, by the curvature, the two ends are
withdrawn from our sight, and where, while we advance, one object appears as
another disappears. Reading Homer is very much like such a circuit; the present
object alone arresting our attention, we lose sight of what precedes, and do not
concern ourselves about what is to follow.”—“Dramatic Literature,” p. 75. [88]
“There cannot be a clearer indication than this description —so graphic in the
original poem—of the true character of the Homeric agora. The multitude who
compose it are listening and acquiescent, not often hesitating, and never
refractory to the chief. The fate which awaits a presumptuous critic, even where
his virulent reproaches are substantially well-founded, is plainly set forth in
the treatment of Thersites; while the unpopularity of such a character is
attested even more by the excessive pains which Homer takes to heap upon him
repulsive personal deformities, than by the chastisement of Odysseus he is lame,
bald, crook-backed, of misshapen head, and squinting vision.”—Grote, vol. i. p.
97. [89] According to Pausanias, both the sprig and the remains of the tree were
exhibited in his time. The tragedians, Lucretius and others, adopted a different
fable to account for the stoppage at Aulis, and seem to have found the sacrifice
of Iphigena better suited to form the subject of a tragedy. Compare Dryden’s
“Æneid,” vol. iii. sqq. [90] _Full of his god, i.e._, Apollo, filled with the
prophetic spirit. “_The_ god” would be more simple and emphatic. [91] Those
critics who have maintained that the “Catalogue of Ships” is an interpolation,
should have paid more attention to these lines, which form a most natural
introduction to their enumeration. [92] The following observation will be useful
to Homeric readers: “Particular animals were, at a later time, consecrated to
particular deities. To Jupiter, Ceres, Juno, Apollo, and Bacchus victims of
advanced age might be offered. An ox of five years old was considered especially
acceptable to Jupiter. A black bull, a ram, or a boar pig, were offerings for
Neptune. A heifer, or a sheep, for Minerva. To Ceres a sow was sacrificed, as an
enemy to corn. The goat to Bacchus, because he fed on vines. Diana was
propitiated with a stag; and to Venus the dove was consecrated. The infernal and
evil deities were to be appeased with black victims. The most acceptable of all
sacrifices was the heifer of a year old, which had never borne the yoke. It was
to be perfect in every limb, healthy, and without blemish.”—“Elgin Marbles,”
vol. i. p. 78. [93] _Idomeneus_, son of Deucalion, was king of Crete. Having
vowed, during a tempest, on his return from Troy, to sacrifice to Neptune the
first creature that should present itself to his eye on the Cretan shore, his
son fell a victim to his rash vow. [94] _Tydeus’ son, i.e._ Diomed. [95] That
is, Ajax, the son of Oïleus, a Locrian. He must be distinguished from the other,
who was king of Salamis. [96] A great deal of nonsense has been written to
account for the word _unbid_, in this line. Even Plato, “Sympos.” p. 315, has
found some curious meaning in what, to us, appears to need no explanation. Was
there any _heroic_ rule of etiquette which prevented one brother-king visiting
another without a formal invitation? [97] Fresh water fowl, especially swans,
were found in great numbers about the Asian Marsh, a fenny tract of country in
Lydia, formed by the river Cayster, near its mouth. See Virgil, “Georgics,” vol.
i. 383, sq. [98] _Scamander_, or Scamandros, was a river of Troas, rising,
according to Strabo, on the highest part of Mount Ida, in the same hill with the
Granicus and the OEdipus, and falling into the sea at Sigaeum; everything tends
to identify it with Mendere, as Wood, Rennell, and others maintain; the Mendere
is 40 miles long, 300 feet broad, deep in the time of flood, nearly dry in the
summer. Dr. Clarke successfully combats the opinion of those who make the
Scamander to have arisen from the springs of Bounabarshy, and traces the source
of the river to the highest mountain in the chain of Ida, now Kusdaghy; receives
the Simois in its course; towards its mouth it is very muddy, and flows through
marshes. Between the Scamander and Simois, Homer’s Troy is supposed to have
stood: this river, according to Homer, was called Xanthus by the gods, Scamander
by men. The waters of the Scamander had the singular property of giving a
beautiful colour to the hair or wool of such animals as bathed in them; hence
the three goddesses, Minerva, Juno, and Venus, bathed there before they appeared
before Paris to obtain the golden apple: the name Xanthus, “yellow,” was given
to the Scamander, from the peculiar colour of its waters, still applicable to
the Mendere, the yellow colour of whose waters attracts the attention of
travellers. [99] It should be “his _chest_ like Neptune.” The torso of Neptune,
in the “Elgin Marbles,” No. 103, (vol. ii. p. 26,) is remarkable for its breadth
and massiveness of development. [100] “Say first, for heav’n hides nothing from
thy view.”—“Paradise Lost,” i. 27.“Ma di’ tu, Musa, come i primi danniMandassero
à Cristiani, e di quai parti:Tu ’l sai; ma di tant’ opra a noi si lungeDebil
aura di fama appena giunge.”—“Gier. Lib.” iv. 19. [101] “The Catalogue is,
perhaps, the portion of the poem in favour of which a claim to separate
authorship has been most plausibly urged. Although the example of Homer has
since rendered some such formal enumeration of the forces engaged, a common
practice in epic poems descriptive of great warlike adventures, still so minute
a statistical detail can neither be considered as imperatively required, nor
perhaps such as would, in ordinary cases, suggest itself to the mind of a poet.
Yet there is scarcely any portion of the Iliad where both historical and
internal evidence are more clearly in favour of a connection from the remotest
period, with the remainder of the work. The composition of the Catalogue,
whensoever it may have taken place, necessarily presumes its author’s
acquaintance with a previously existing Iliad. It were impossible otherwise to
account for the harmony observable in the recurrence of so vast a number of
proper names, most of them historically unimportant, and not a few altogether
fictitious: or of so many geographical and genealogical details as are condensed
in these few hundred lines, and incidentally scattered over the thousands which
follow: equally inexplicable were the pointed allusions occurring in this
episode to events narrated in the previous and subsequent text, several of which
could hardly be of traditional notoriety, but through the medium of the
Iliad.”—Mure, “Language and Literature of Greece,” vol. i. p. 263. [102] _Twice
Sixty:_ “Thucydides observes that the Bœotian vessels, which carried one hundred
and twenty men each, were probably meant to be the largest in the fleet, and
those of Philoctetes, carrying fifty each, the smallest. The average would be
eighty-five, and Thucydides supposes the troops to have rowed and navigated
themselves; and that very few, besides the chiefs, went as mere passengers or
landsmen. In short, we have in the Homeric descriptions the complete picture of
an Indian or African war canoe, many of which are considerably larger than the
largest scale assigned to those of the Greeks. If the total number of the Greek
ships be taken at twelve hundred, according to Thucydides, although in point of
fact there are only eleven hundred and eighty-six in the Catalogue, the amount
of the army, upon the foregoing average, will be about a hundred and two
thousand men. The historian considers this a small force as representing all
Greece. Bryant, comparing it with the allied army at Platae, thinks it so large
as to prove the entire falsehood of the whole story; and his reasonings and
calculations are, for their curiosity, well worth a careful perusal.”—Coleridge,
p. 211, sq. [103] The mention of Corinth is an anachronism, as that city was
called Ephyre before its capture by the Dorians. But Velleius, vol. i. p. 3,
well observes, that the poet would naturally speak of various towns and cities
by the names by which they were known in his own time. [104] “Adam, the
goodliest man of men since born, His sons, the fairest of her daughters
Eve.’—“Paradise Lost,” iv. 323. [105] _Æsetes’ tomb_. Monuments were often built
on the sea-coast, and of a considerable height, so as to serve as watch-towers
or land marks. See my notes to my prose translations of the “Odyssey,” ii. p.
21, or on Eur. “Alcest.” vol. i. p. 240. [106] _Zeleia_, another name for Lycia.
The inhabitants were greatly devoted to the worship of Apollo. See Muller,
“Dorians,” vol. i. p. 248. [107] _Barbarous tongues_. “Various as were the
dialects of the Greeks—and these differences existed not only between the
several tribes, but even between neighbouring cities—they yet acknowledged in
their language that they formed but one nation were but branches of the same
family. Homer has ‘men of other tongues:’ and yet Homer had no general name for
the Greek nation.”—Heeren, “Ancient Greece,” Section vii. p. 107, sq. [108] _The
cranes_.“Marking the tracts of air, the clamorous cranesWheel their due flight
in varied ranks descried:And each with outstretch’d neck his rank maintains,In
marshall’d order through th’ ethereal void.”Lorenzo de Medici, in Roscoe’s Life,
Appendix.See Cary’s Dante: “Hell,” canto v. [109] _Silent, breathing rage._“Thus
they,Breathing united force with fixed thought,Moved on in silence.”“Paradise
Lost,” book i. 559. [110] “As when some peasant in a bushy brakeHas with unwary
footing press’d a snake;He starts aside, astonish’d, when he spiesHis rising
crest, blue neck, and rolling eyes”Dryden’s Virgil, ii. 510. [111] Dysparis,
_i.e._ unlucky, ill fated, Paris. This alludes to the evils which resulted from
his having been brought up, despite the omens which attended his birth. [112]
The following scene, in which Homer has contrived to introduce so brilliant a
sketch of the Grecian warriors, has been imitated by Euripides, who in his
“Phoenissae” represents Antigone surveying the opposing champions from a high
tower, while the paedagogus describes their insignia and details their
histories. [113] _No wonder_, &c. Zeuxis, the celebrated artist, is said to have
appended these lines to his picture of Helen, as a motto. Valer Max. iii. 7.
[114] The early epic was largely occupied with the exploits and sufferings of
women, or heroines, the wives and daughters of the Grecian heroes. A nation of
courageous, hardy, indefatigable women, dwelling apart from men, permitting only
a short temporary intercourse, for the purpose of renovating their numbers,
burning out their right breast with a view of enabling themselves to draw the
bow freely; this was at once a general type, stimulating to the fancy of the
poet, and a theme eminently popular with his hearers. We find these warlike
females constantly reappearing in the ancient poems, and universally accepted as
past realities in the Iliad. When Priam wishes to illustrate emphatically the
most numerous host in which he ever found himself included, he tells us that it
was assembled in Phrygia, on the banks of the Sangarius, for the purpose of
resisting the formidable Amazons. When Bellerophon is to be employed in a deadly
and perilous undertaking, by those who prudently wished to procure his death, he
is despatched against the Amazons.—Grote, vol. i p. 289. [115] _Antenor_, like
Æneas, had always been favourable to the restoration of Helen. Liv 1. 2.
[116]“His lab’ring heart with sudden rapture seizedHe paus’d, and on the ground
in silence gazed.Unskill’d and uninspired he seems to stand,Nor lifts the eye,
nor graceful moves the hand:Then, while the chiefs in still attention hung,Pours
the full tide of eloquence along;While from his lips the melting torrent
flows,Soft as the fleeces of descending snows.Now stronger notes engage the
listening crowd,Louder the accents rise, and yet more loud,Like thunders rolling
from a distant cloud.”Merrick’s “Tryphiodorus,” 148, 99. [117] Duport, “Gnomol.
Homer,” p. 20, well observes that this comparison may also be sarcastically
applied to the _frigid_ style of oratory. It, of course, here merely denotes the
ready fluency of Ulysses. [118] _Her brothers’ doom_. They perished in combat
with Lynceus and Idas, whilst besieging Sparta. See Hygin. Poet Astr. 32, 22.
Virgil and others, however, make them share immortality by turns. [119] Idreus
was the arm-bearer and charioteer of king Priam, slain during this war. Cf. Æn,
vi. 487. [120] _Scæa’s gates_, rather _Scæan gates_, _i.e._ the left-hand gates.
[121] This was customary in all sacrifices. Hence we find Iras descending to cut
off the hair of Dido, before which she could not expire. [122] _Nor
pierced_.“This said, his feeble hand a jav’lin threw,Which, flutt’ring, seemed
to loiter as it flew,Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,And faintly
tinkled on the brazen shield.”Dryden’s Virgil, ii. 742. [123] _Reveal’d the
queen_.“Thus having said, she turn’d and made appearHer neck refulgent and
dishevell’d hair,Which, flowing from her shoulders, reach’d the ground,And
widely spread ambrosial scents around.In length of train descends her sweeping
gown;And, by her graceful walk, the queen of love is known.”Dryden’s Virgil, i.
556. [124] _Cranae’s isle, i.e._ Athens. See the “Schol.” and Alberti’s
“Hesychius,” vol. ii. p. 338. This name was derived from one of its early kings,
Cranaus. [125] _The martial maid_. In the original, “Minerva Alalcomeneis,”
_i.e. the defender_, so called from her temple at Alalcomene in Bœotia. [126]
“Anything for a quiet life!” [127] —_Argos_. The worship of Juno at Argos was
very celebrated in ancient times, and she was regarded as the patron deity of
that city. Apul. Met., vi. p. 453; Servius on Virg. Æn., i. 28. [128] —_A wife
and sister_.“But I, who walk in awful state aboveThe majesty of heav’n, the
sister-wife of Jove.”Dryden’s “Virgil,” i. 70.So Apuleius, _l. c._ speaks of her
as “Jovis germana et conjux, and soHorace, Od. iii. 3, 64, “conjuge me Jovis et
sorore.” [129]“Thither came Uriel, gleaming through the evenOn a sunbeam, swift
as a shooting starIn autumn thwarts the night, when vapours firedImpress the
air, and shows the marinerFrom what point of his compass to bewareImpetuous
winds.”—“Paradise Lost,” iv. 555. [130] _Æsepus’ flood_. A river of Mysia,
rising from Mount Cotyius, in the southern part of the chain of Ida. [131]
_Zelia_, a town of Troas, at the foot of Ida. [132] _Podaleirius_ and _Machäon_
are the leeches of the Grecian army, highly prized and consulted by all the
wounded chiefs. Their medical renown was further prolonged in the subsequent
poem of Arktinus, the Iliou Persis, wherein the one was represented as
unrivalled in surgical operations, the other as sagacious in detecting and
appreciating morbid symptoms. It was Podaleirius who first noticed the glaring
eyes and disturbed deportment which preceded the suicide of Ajax. “Galen appears
uncertain whether Asklepius (as well as Dionysus) was originally a god, or
whether he was first a man and then became afterwards a god; but Apollodorus
professed to fix the exact date of his apotheosis. Throughout all the historical
ages the descendants of Asklepius were numerous and widely diffused. The many
families or gentes, called Asklepiads, who devoted themselves to the study and
practice of medicine, and who principally dwelt near the temples of Asklepius,
whither sick and suffering men came to obtain relief—all recognized the god not
merely as the object of their common worship, but also as their actual
progenitor.”—Grote vol. i. p. 248. [133]“The plant she bruises with a stone, and
standsTempering the juice between her ivory handsThis o’er her breast she sheds
with sovereign artAnd bathes with gentle touch the wounded partThe wound such
virtue from the juice derives,At once the blood is stanch’d, the youth
revives.”“Orlando Furioso,” book 1. [134] _Well might I wish._“Would heav’n
(said he) my strength and youth recall,Such as I was beneath Praeneste’s
wall—Then when I made the foremost foes retire,And set whole heaps of conquer’d
shields on fire;When Herilus in single fight I slew,Whom with three lives
Feronia did endue.”Dryden’s Virgil, viii. 742. [135] _Sthenelus_, a son of
Capaneus, one of the Epigoni. He was one of the suitors of Helen, and is said to
have been one of those who entered Troy inside the wooden horse. [136]
_Forwarn’d the horrors_. The same portent has already been mentioned. To this
day, modern nations are not wholly free from this superstition. [137] _Sevenfold
city_, Bœotian Thebes, which had seven gates. [138] _As when the winds_.“Thus,
when a black-brow’d gust begins to rise,White foam at first on the curl’d ocean
fries;Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies,Till, by the fury of the
storm full blown,The muddy billow o’er the clouds is thrown.”Dryden’s Virgil,
vii. 736. [139]“StoodLike Teneriffe or Atlas unremoved;His stature reach’d the
sky.”—“Paradise Lost,” iv. 986. [140] The Abantes seem to have been of Thracian
origin. [141] I may, once for all, remark that Homer is most anatomically
correct as to the parts of the body in which a wound would be immediately
mortal. [142] _Ænus_, a fountain almost proverbial for its coldness. [143]
Compare Tasso, Gier. Lib., xx. 7:“Nuovo favor del cielo in lui niluceE ’l fa
grande, et angusto oltre il costume.Gl’ empie d’ honor la faccia, e vi riduceDi
giovinezza il bel purpureo lume.” [144]“Or deluges, descending on the
plains,Sweep o’er the yellow year, destroy the painsOf lab’ring oxen, and the
peasant’s gains;Uproot the forest oaks, and bear awayFlocks, folds, and trees,
an undistinguish’d prey.”Dryden’s Virgil ii. 408. [145] _From mortal mists_.“But
to nobler sightsMichael from Adam’s eyes the film removed.”“Paradise Lost,” xi.
411. [146] _The race of those_.“A pair of coursers, born of heav’nly breed,Who
from their nostrils breathed ethereal fire;Whom Circe stole from her celestial
sire,By substituting mares produced on earth,Whose wombs conceived a more than
mortal birth.Dryden’s Virgil, vii. 386, sqq. [147] The belief in the existence
of men of larger stature in earlier times, is by no means confined to Homer.
[148] _Such stream, i.e._ the _ichor_, or blood of the gods.“A stream of
nect’rous humour issuing flow’d,Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may
bleed.”“Paradise Lost,” vi. 339. [149] This was during the wars with the Titans.
[150] _Amphitryon’s son_, Hercules, born to Jove by Alcmena, the wife of
Amphitryon. [151] _Ægialé_ daughter of Adrastus. The Cyclic poets (See Anthon’s
Lempriere, _s. v._) assert Venus incited her to infidelity, in revenge for the
wound she had received from her husband. [152] _Pheræ_, a town of Pelasgiotis,
in Thessaly. [153] _Tlepolemus_, son of Hercules and Astyochia. Having left his
native country, Argos, in consequence of the accidental murder of Liscymnius, he
was commanded by an oracle to retire to Rhodes. Here he was chosen king, and
accompanied the Trojan expedition. After his death, certain games were
instituted at Rhodes in his honour, the victors being rewarded with crowns of
poplar. [154] These heroes’ names have since passed into a kind of proverb,
designating the _oi polloi_ or mob. [155] _Spontaneous open_.“Veil’d with his
gorgeous wings, upspringing lightFlew through the midst of heaven; th’ angelic
quires,On each hand parting, to his speed gave wayThrough all th’ empyreal road;
till at the gateOf heaven arrived, the gate self-open’d wide,On golden hinges
turning.”—“Paradise Lost,” v. 250. [156]“Till Morn,Waked by the circling Hours,
with rosy handUnbarr’d the gates of light.”—“Paradise Lost,” vi, 2. [157] _Far
as a shepherd_. “With what majesty and pomp does Homer exalt his deities! He
here measures the leap of the horses by the extent of the world. And who is
there, that, considering the exceeding greatness of the space would not with
reason cry out that ‘If the steeds of the deity were to take a second leap, the
world would want room for it’?”—Longinus, Section 8. [158] “No trumpets, or any
other instruments of sound, are used in the Homeric action itself; but the
trumpet was known, and is introduced for the purpose of illustration as employed
in war. Hence arose the value of a loud voice in a commander; Stentor was an
indispensable officer... In the early Saracen campaigns frequent mention is made
of the service rendered by men of uncommonly strong voices; the battle of Honain
was restored by the shouts and menaces of Abbas, the uncle of Mohammed,”
&c.—Coleridge, p. 213. [159] “Long had the wav’ring god the war delay’d,While
Greece and Troy alternate own’d his aid.”Merrick’s “Tryphiodorus,” vi. 761, sq.
[160] _Pæon_ seems to have been to the gods, what Podaleirius and Machaon were
to the Grecian heroes. [161] _Arisbe_, a colony of the Mitylenaeans in Troas.
[162] _Pedasus_, a town near Pylos. [163] _Rich heaps of brass_. “The halls of
Alkinous and Menelaus glitter with gold, copper, and electrum; while large
stocks of yet unemployed metal—gold, copper, and iron are stored up in the
treasure-chamber of Odysseus and other chiefs. Coined money is unknown in the
Homeric age—the trade carried on being one of barter. In reference also to the
metals, it deserves to be remarked, that the Homeric descriptions universally
suppose copper, and not iron, to be employed for arms, both offensive and
defensive. By what process the copper was tempered and hardened, so as to serve
the purpose of the warrior, we do not know; but the use of iron for these
objects belongs to a later age.”—Grote, vol. ii. p. 142. [164] _Oh impotent_,
&c. “In battle, quarter seems never to have been given, except with a view to
the ransom of the prisoner. Agamemnon reproaches Menelaus with unmanly softness,
when he is on the point of sparing a fallen enemy, and himself puts the
suppliant to the sword.”—Thirlwall, vol. i. p. 181 [165]“The ruthless steel,
impatient of delay,Forbade the sire to linger out the day.It struck the bending
father to the earth,And cropt the wailing infant at the birth.Can innocents the
rage of parties know,And they who ne’er offended find a foe?”Rowe’s Lucan, bk.
ii. [166]“Meantime the Trojan dames, oppress’d with woe,To Pallas’ fane in long
procession go,In hopes to reconcile their heav’nly foe:They weep; they beat
their breasts; they rend their hair,And rich embroider’d vests for presents
bear.”Dryden’s Virgil, i. 670 [167] The manner in which this episode is
introduced, is well illustrated by the following remarks of Mure, vol. i. p.298:
“The poet’s method of introducing his episode, also, illustrates in a curious
manner his tact in the dramatic department of his art. Where, for example, one
or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to be executed at a certain
distance of time or place, the fulfilment of this task is not, as a general
rule, immediately described. A certain interval is allowed them for reaching the
appointed scene of action, which interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a
temporary continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a
while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further account of the
mission is resumed.” [168] _With tablets sealed_. These probably were only
devices of a hieroglyphical character. Whether writing was known in the Homeric
times is utterly uncertain. See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq. [169] _Solymæan
crew_, a people of Lycia. [170] From this “melancholy madness” of Bellerophon,
hypochondria received the name of “Morbus Bellerophonteus.” See my notes in my
prose translation, p. 112. The “Aleian field,” _i.e._ “the plain of wandering,”
was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in Cilicia. [171] _His own,
of gold_. This bad bargain has passed into a common proverb. See Aulus Gellius,
ii, 23. [172] _Scæan, i e._ left hand. [173] _In fifty chambers_.“The fifty
nuptial beds, (such hopes had he,So large a promise of a progeny,)The ports of
plated gold, and hung with spoils.”Dryden’s Virgil, ii.658 [174] _O would kind
earth_, &c. “It is apparently a sudden, irregular burst of popular indignation
to which Hector alludes, when he regrets that the Trojans had not spirit enough
to cover Paris with a mantle of stones. This, however, was also one of the
ordinary formal modes of punishment for great public offences. It may have been
originally connected with the same feeling—the desire of avoiding the pollution
of bloodshed—which seems to have suggested the practice of burying prisoners
alive, with a scantling of food by their side. Though Homer makes no mention of
this horrible usage, the example of the Roman Vestals affords reasons for
believing that, in ascribing it to the heroic ages, Sophocles followed an
authentic tradition.”—Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i. p. 171, sq. [175] _Paris’
lofty dome_. “With respect to the private dwellings, which are oftenest
described, the poet’s language barely enables us to form a general notion of
their ordinary plan, and affords no conception of the style which prevailed in
them or of their effect on the eye. It seems indeed probable, from the manner in
which he dwells on their metallic ornaments that the higher beauty of proportion
was but little required or understood, and it is, perhaps, strength and
convenience, rather than elegance, that he means to commend, in speaking of the
fair house which Paris had built for himself with the aid of the most skilful
masons of Troy.”—Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i. p. 231. [176] _The wanton
courser_.“Come destrier, che da le regie stalle Ove a l’usa de l’arme si
riserba,Fugge, e libero al fiu per largo calle Va tragl’ armenti, o al fiume
usato, o a l’herba.”Gier, Lib. ix. 75. [177] _Casque_. The original word is
stephanae, about the meaning of which there is some little doubt. Some take it
for a different kind of cap or helmet, others for the rim, others for the cone,
of the helmet. [178] _Athenian maid:_ Minerva. [179] _Celadon_, a river of Elis.
[180] _Oïleus, i.e._ Ajax, the son of Oïleus, in contradistinction to Ajax, son
of Telamon. [181] _In the general’s helm_. It was customary to put the lots into
a helmet, in which they were well shaken up; each man then took his choice.
[182] _God of Thrace_. Mars, or Mavors, according to his Thracian epithet. Hence
“Mavortia Mœnia.” [183] _Grimly he smiled_.“And deathGrinn’d horribly a ghastly
smile.”—“Paradise Lost,” ii. 845.“There Mavors standsGrinning with ghastly
feature.”—Carey’s Dante: Hell, v. [184]“Sete ò guerrieri, incomincio Pindoro,Con
pari honor di pari ambo possenti,Dunque cessi la pugna, e non sian rotteLe
ragioni, e ’l riposo, e de la notte.”—Gier. Lib. vi. 51. [185] It was an ancient
style of compliment to give a larger portion of food to the conqueror, or person
to whom respect was to be shown. See Virg. Æn. viii. 181. Thus Benjamin was
honoured with a “double portion.” Gen. xliii. 34. [186] _Embattled walls._
“Another essential basis of mechanical unity in the poem is the construction of
the rampart. This takes place in the seventh book. The reason ascribed for the
glaring improbability that the Greeks should have left their camp and fleet
unfortified during nine years, in the midst of a hostile country, is a purely
poetical one: ‘So long as Achilles fought, the terror of his name sufficed to
keep every foe at a distance.’ The disasters consequent on his secession first
led to the necessity of other means of protection. Accordingly, in the battles
previous to the eighth book, no allusion occurs to a rampart; in all those which
follow it forms a prominent feature. Here, then, in the anomaly as in the
propriety of the Iliad, the destiny of Achilles, or rather this peculiar crisis
of it, forms the pervading bond of connexion to the whole poem.”—Mure, vol. i.,
p. 257. [187] _What cause of fear_, &c.“Seest thou not this? Or do we fear in
vainThy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?”Dryden’s Virgil, iv. 304.
[188] _In exchange_. These lines are referred to by Theophilus, the Roman
lawyer, iii. tit. xxiii. § 1, as exhibiting the most ancient mention of barter.
[189] “A similar bond of connexion, in the military details of the narrative, is
the decree issued by Jupiter, at the commencement of the eighth book, against
any further interference of the gods in the battles. In the opening of the
twentieth book this interdict is withdrawn. During the twelve intermediate books
it is kept steadily in view. No interposition takes place but on the part of the
specially authorised agents of Jove, or on that of one or two contumacious
deities, described as boldly setting his commands at defiance, but checked and
reprimanded for their disobedience; while the other divine warriors, who in the
previous and subsequent cantos are so active in support of their favourite
heroes, repeatedly allude to the supreme edict as the cause of their present
inactivity.”—Mure, vol. i. p 257. See however, Muller, “Greek Literature,” ch.
v. Section 6, and Grote, vol. ii. p. 252. [190] “As far removed from God and
light of heaven,As from the centre thrice to th’ utmost pole.”—“Paradise
Lost.”“E quanto è da le stelle al basso inferno,Tanto è più in sù de la stellata
spera”—Gier. Lib. i. 7.“Some of the epithets which Homer applies to the heavens
seem to implythat he considered it as a solid vault of metal. But it is
notnecessary to construe these epithets so literally, nor to draw any
suchinference from his description of Atlas, who holds the lofty pillarswhich
keep earth and heaven asunder. Yet it would seem, from the mannerin which the
height of heaven is compared with the depth of Tartarus,that the region of light
was thought to have certain bounds. The summitof the Thessalian Olympus was
regarded as the highest point on theearth, and it is not always carefully
distinguished from the aerianregions above The idea of a seat of the
gods—perhaps derived from amore ancient tradition, in which it was not attached
to anygeographical site—seems to be indistinctly blended in the poet’s mindwith
that of the real mountain.”—Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i. p. 217,sq. [191]“Now
lately heav’n, earth, another worldHung e’er my realm, link’d in a golden
chainTo that side heav’n.”—“Paradise Lost,” ii. 1004. [192] _His golden
scales_.“Jove now, sole arbiter of peace and war,Held forth the fatal balance
from afar:Each host he weighs; by turns they both prevail,Till Troy descending
fix’d the doubtful scale.”Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, v 687, sqq.“Oh’ Eternal, to
prevent such horrid fray,Hung forth in heav’n his golden scales,Wherein all
things created first he weighed;The pendulous round earth, with balanced airIn
counterpoise; now ponders all events,Battles and realms. In these he puts two
weights,The sequel each of parting and of fight:The latter quick up flew, and
kick’d the beam.”“Paradise Lost,” iv. 496. [193] _And now_, &c.“And now all
heavenHad gone to wrack, with ruin overspread;Had not th’ Almighty Father, where
he sits... foreseen.”—“Paradise Lost,” vi. 669. [194] _Gerenian Nestor_. The
epithet _Gerenian_ either refers to the name of a place in which Nestor was
educated, or merely signifies honoured, revered. See Schol. Venet. in II. B.
336; Strabo, viii. p. 340. [195] _Ægae, Helicè_. Both these towns were
conspicuous for their worship of Neptune. [196] _As full blown_, &c.“Il suo
Lesbia quasi bel fior succiso,E in atto si gentil languir tremantiGl’ occhi, e
cader siu ’l tergo il collo mira.”Gier. Lib. ix. 85. [197] _Ungrateful_, because
the cause in which they were engaged was unjust.“Struck by the lab’ring priests’
uplifted handsThe victims fall: to heav’n they make their pray’r,The curling
vapours load the ambient air.But vain their toil: the pow’rs who rule the
skiesAverse beheld the ungrateful sacrifice.”Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, vi. 527,
sqq. [198]“As when about the silver moon, when aire is free from winde,And stars
shine cleare, to whose sweet beams high prospects on thebrowsOf all steepe hills
and pinnacles thrust up themselves for shows,And even the lowly valleys joy to
glitter in their sight;When the unmeasured firmament bursts to disclose her
light,And all the signs in heaven are seene, that glad the shepherd’s
heart.”Chapman. [199] This flight of the Greeks, according to Buttmann, Lexil.
p. 358, was not a supernatural flight caused by the gods, but “a great and
general one, caused by Hector and the Trojans, but with the approval of Jove.”
[200] Grote, vol. ii. p. 91, after noticing the modest calmness and respect with
which Nestor addresses Agamemnon, observes, “The Homeric Council is a purely
consultative body, assembled not with any power of peremptorily arresting
mischievous resolves of the king, but solely for his information and guidance.”
[201] In the heroic times, it is not unfrequent for the king to receive presents
to purchase freedom from his wrath, or immunity from his exactions. Such gifts
gradually became regular, and formed the income of the German, (Tacit. Germ.
Section 15) Persian, (Herodot. iii.89), and other kings. So, too, in the middle
ages, ‘The feudal aids are the beginning of taxation, of which they for a long
time answered the purpose.’ (Hallam, Middle Ages, ch. x. pt. 1, p. 189) This
fact frees Achilles from the apparent charge of sordidness. Plato, however, (De
Rep. vi. 4), says, “We cannot commend Phœnix, the tutor of Achilles, as if he
spoke correctly, when counselling him to accept of presents and assist the
Greeks, but, without presents, not to desist from his wrath, nor again, should
we commend Achilles himself, or approve of his being so covetous as to receive
presents from Agamemnon,” &c. [202] It may be observed, that, brief as is the
mention of Briseïs in the Iliad, and small the part she plays—what little is
said is pre-eminently calculated to enhance her fitness to be the bride of
Achilles. Purity, and retiring delicacy, are features well contrasted with the
rough, but tender disposition of the hero. [203] _Laodice_. Iphianassa, or
Iphigenia, is not mentioned by Homer, among the daughters of Agamemnon. [204]
“Agamemnon, when he offers to transfer to Achilles seven towns inhabited by
wealthy husbandmen, who would enrich their lord by presents and tribute, seems
likewise to assume rather a property in them, than an authority over them. And
the same thing may be intimated when it is said that Peleus bestowed a great
people, the Dolopes of Phthia, on Phœnix.”—Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i Section 6,
p. 162, note. [205] _Pray in deep silence_. Rather: “use well-omened words;” or,
as Kennedy has explained it, “Abstain from expressions unsuitable to the
solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might defeat the object
of their supplications.” [206] _Purest hands_. This is one of the most ancient
superstitions respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in
tradition. [207] It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled
siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in piratical
expeditions about its neighborhood. Such a one was that of which Achilles now
speaks. From the following verses, it is evident that fruits of these maraudings
went to the common support of the expedition, and not to the successful
plunderer. [208] _Pythia_, the capital of Achilles’ Thessalian domains. [209]
_Orchomenian town_. The topography of Orchomenus, in Bœotia, “situated,” as it
was, “on the northern bank of the lake Æpais, which receives not only the river
Cephisus from the valleys of Phocis, but also other rivers from Parnassus and
Helicon” (Grote, vol. p. 181), was a sufficient reason for its prosperity and
decay. “As long as the channels of these waters were diligently watched and kept
clear, a large portion of the lake was in the condition of alluvial land,
pre-eminently rich and fertile. But when the channels came to be either
neglected, or designedly choked up by an enemy, the water accumulated in such a
degree as to occupy the soil of more than one ancient islet, and to occasion the
change of the site of Orchomenus itself from the plain to the declivity of Mount
Hyphanteion.” (Ibid.) [210] The phrase “hundred gates,” &c., seems to be merely
expressive of a great number. See notes to my prose translation, p. 162. [211]
Compare the following pretty lines of Quintus Calaber (Dyce’s Select
Translations, p 88).—“Many gifts he gave, and o’erDolopia bade me rule; thee in
his armsHe brought an infant, on my bosom laidThe precious charge, and anxiously
enjoin’dThat I should rear thee as my own with allA parent’s love. I fail’d not
in my trustAnd oft, while round my neck thy hands were lock’d,From thy sweet
lips the half articulate soundOf Father came; and oft, as children use,Mewling
and puking didst thou drench my tunic.”“This description,” observes my learned
friend (notes, p. 121) “istaken from the passage of Homer, II ix, in translating
which, Pope,with that squeamish, artificial taste, which distinguished the age
ofAnne, omits the natural (and, let me add, affecting) circumstance.”“And the
wineHeld to thy lips, and many a time in fitsOf infant frowardness the purple
juiceRejecting thou hast deluged all my vest,And fill’d my bosom.” —Cowper.
[212] _Where Calydon_. For a good sketch of the story of Meleager, too long to
be inserted here, see Grote, vol. i. p. 195, sqq.; and for the authorities, see
my notes to the prose translation, p. 166. [213] “_Gifts can conquer_”—It is
well observed by Bishop Thirlwall, “Greece,” vol. i. p, 180, that the law of
honour among the Greeks did not compel them to treasure up in their memory the
offensive language which might be addressed to them by a passionate adversary,
nor to conceive that it left a stain which could only be washed away by blood.
Even for real and deep injuries they were commonly willing to accept a pecuniary
compensation.” [214] “The boon of sleep.”—Milton [215]“All else of nature’s
common gift partake:Unhappy Dido was alone awake.”—Dryden’s Virgil, iv. 767.
[216] _The king of Crete:_ Idomeneus. [217] _Soft wool within, i e._ a kind of
woollen stuffing, pressed in between the straps, to protect the head, and make
the helmet fit close. [218] “All the circumstances of this action—the night,
Rhesus buried in a profound sleep, and Diomede with the sword in his hand
hanging over the head of that prince—furnished Homer with the idea of this
fiction, which represents Rhesus lying fast asleep, and, as it were, beholding
his enemy in a dream, plunging the sword into his bosom. This image is very
natural; for a man in his condition awakes no farther than to see confusedly
what environs him, and to think it not a reality but a dream.”—Pope.“There’s one
did laugh in his sleep, and one cry’d murder;They wak’d each other.”—_Macbeth_.
[219]“Aurora now had left her saffron bed,And beams of early light the heavens
o’erspread.”Dryden’s Virgil, iv. 639 [220] _Red drops of blood_. “This
phenomenon, if a mere fruit of the poet’s imagination, might seem arbitrary or
far-fetched. It is one, however, of ascertained reality, and of no uncommon
occurrence in the climate of Greece.”—Mure, i p. 493. Cf. Tasso, Gier. Lib. ix.
15:“La terra in vece del notturno geloBagnan rugiade tepide, e sanguigne.”
[221]“No thought of flight,None of retreat, no unbecoming deedThat argued
fear.”—“Paradise Lost,” vi. 236. [222] _One of love_. Although a bastard brother
received only a small portion of the inheritance, he was commonly very well
treated. Priam appears to be the only one of whom polygamy is directly asserted
in the Iliad. Grote, vol. ii. p. 114, note. [223] “Circled with foes as when a
packe of bloodie jackals cling About a goodly palmed hart, hurt with a hunter’s
bow Whose escape his nimble feet insure, whilst his warm blood doth flow, And
his light knees have power to move: but (maistred by his wound) Embost within a
shady hill, the jackals charge him round, And teare his flesh—when instantly
fortune sends in the powers Of some sterne lion, with whose sighte they flie and
he devours. So they around Ulysses prest.”—Chapman. [224] _Simois, railing_,
&c.“In those bloody fieldsWhere Simois rolls the bodies and the shieldsOf
heroes.”—Dryden’s Virgil, i. 142. [225]“Where yon disorder’d heap of ruin
lies,Stones rent from stones,—where clouds of dust arise,—Amid that smother,
Neptune holds his place,Below the wall’s foundation drives his mace,And heaves
the building from the solid base.”Dryden’s Virgil, ii. 825. [226] _Why boast
we_.“Wherefore do I assumeThese royalties and not refuse to reign,Refusing to
accept as great a shareOf hazard as of honour, due alike to himWho reigns, and
so much to him dueOf hazard more, as he above the restHigh honour’d
sits.”—“Paradise Lost,” ii. 450. [227] _Each equal weight_.“Long time in even
scaleThe battle hung.”—“Paradise Lost,” vi. 245. [228]“He on his impious foes
right onward drove,_Gloomy as night_.”—“Paradise Lost,” vi. 831 [229] _Renown’d
for justice and for length of days_, Arrian. de Exp. Alex. iv. p. 239, also
speaks of the independence of these people, which he regards as the result of
their poverty and uprightness. Some authors have regarded the phrase
“Hippomolgian,” _i.e._ “milking their mares,” as an epithet applicable to
numerous tribes, since the oldest of the Samatian nomads made their mares’ milk
one of their chief articles of diet. The epithet abion or abion, in this
passage, has occasioned much discussion. It may mean, according as we read it,
either “long-lived,” or “bowless,” the latter epithet indicating that they did
not depend upon archery for subsistence. [230] Compare Chapman’s quaint, bold
verses:—“And as a round piece of a rocke, which with a winter’s floodIs from his
top torn, when a shoure poured from a bursten cloud,Hath broke the naturall band
it had within the roughftey rock,Flies jumping all adourne the woods, resounding
everie shocke,And on, uncheckt, it headlong leaps till in a plaine it stay,And
then (tho’ never so impelled), it stirs not any way:—So Hector,—” [231] This
book forms a most agreeable interruption to the continuous round of battles,
which occupy the latter part of the Iliad. It is as well to observe, that the
sameness of these scenes renders many notes unnecessary. [232] _Who to Tydeus
owes, i.e._ Diomed. [233] Compare Tasso:—Teneri sdegni, e placide, e
tranquilleRepulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci,Sorrisi, parolette, e dolci
stilleDi pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci.”Gier. Lib. xvi. 25 [234]
Compare the description of the dwelling of Sleep in Orlando Furioso, bk. vi.
[235]“Twice seven, the charming daughters of the main—Around my person wait, and
bear my train:Succeed my wish, and second my design,The fairest, Deiopeia, shall
be thine.”Dryden’s Virgil, Æn. i. 107, seq. [236] _And Minos_. “By Homer, Minos
is described as the son of Jupiter, and of the daughter of Phœnix, whom all
succeeding authors name Europa; and he is thus carried back into the remotest
period of Cretan antiquity known to the poet, apparently as a native hero,
Illustrious enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow his descent
to be traced to any other source. But in a genealogy recorded by later writers,
he is likewise the adopted son of Asterius, as descendant of Dorus, the son of
Helen, and is thus connected with a colony said to have been led into Creta by
Tentamus, or Tectamus, son of Dorus, who is related either to have crossed over
from Thessaly, or to have embarked at Malea after having led his followers by
land into Laconia.”—Thirlwall, p. 136, seq. [237] Milton has emulated this
passage, in describing the couch of our first parents:—“Underneath the
violet,Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,’Broider’d the ground.”—“Paradise
Lost,” iv. 700. [238] _He lies protected_.“Forthwith on all sides to his aid was
runBy angels many and strong, who interpos’dDefence, while others bore him on
their shieldsBack to his chariot, where it stood retir’dFrom off the files of
war; there they him laid,Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame.”“Paradise
Lost,” vi. 335, seq. [239] _The brazen dome_. See the note on Bk. viii. Page
142. [240] _For, by the gods! who flies_. Observe the bold ellipsis of “he
cries,” and the transition from the direct to the oblique construction. So in
Milton:—“Thus at their shady lodge arriv’d, both stood,Both turn’d, and under
open sky ador’dThe God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,Which they
beheld, the moon’s resplendent globe,And starry pole.—Thou also mad’st the
night,Maker omnipotent, and thou the day.”Milton, “Paradise Lost,” Book iv.
[241] _So some tall rock_.“But like a rock unmov’d, a rock that bravesThe raging
tempest, and the rising waves—Propp’d on himself he stands: his solid sidesWash
off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides.”Dryden’s Virgil, vii. 809. [242]
Protesilaus was the first Greek who fell, slain by Hector, as he leaped from the
vessel to the Trojan shore. He was buried on the Chersonese, near the city of
Plagusa. Hygin Fab. ciii. Tzetz. on Lycophr. 245, 528. There is a most elegant
tribute to his memory in the Preface to the Heroica of Philostratus. [243] _His
best beloved_. The following elegant remarks of Thirlwall (Greece, vol. i, p.
176 seq.) well illustrate the character of the friendship subsisting between
these two heroes— “One of the noblest and most amiable sides of the Greek
character, is the readiness with which it lent itself to construct intimate and
durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in the earliest
than in later times. It was indeed connected with the comparatively low
estimation in which female society was held; but the devotedness and constancy
with which these attachments were maintained, was not the less admirable and
engaging. The heroic companions whom we find celebrated partly by Homer and
partly in traditions which, if not of equal antiquity, were grounded on the same
feeling, seem to have but one heart and soul, with scarcely a wish or object
apart, and only to live as they are always ready to die for one another. It is
true that the relation between them is not always one of perfect equality; but
this is a circumstance which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to the
poetical description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea which it
presents. Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of Theseus and
Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may owe the greater part of
their fame to the later epic or even dramatic poetry, the moral groundwork
undoubtedly subsisted in the period to which the traditions are referred. The
argument of the Iliad mainly turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus,
whose love for the greater hero is only tempered by reverence for his higher
birth and his unequalled prowess. But the mutual regard which united Idomeneus
and Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus, though, as the persons themselves are less
important, it is kept more in the back-ground, is manifestly viewed by the poet
in the same light. The idea of a Greek hero seems not to have been thought
complete, without such a brother in arms by his side.”—Thirlwall, Greece, vol.
i. p. 176, seq. [244]“As hungry wolves with raging appetite,Scour through the
fields, ne’er fear the stormy night—Their whelps at home expect the promised
food,And long to temper their dry chaps in blood—So rush’d we forth at
once.”—Dryden’s Virgil, ii. 479. [245] _The destinies ordain_.—“In the
mythology, also, of the Iliad, purely Pagan as it is, we discover one important
truth unconsciously involved, which was almost entirely lost from view amidst
the nearly equal scepticism and credulity of subsequent ages. Zeus or Jupiter is
popularly to be taken as omnipotent. No distinct empire is assigned to fate or
fortune; the will of the father of gods and men is absolute and uncontrollable.
This seems to be the true character of the Homeric deity, and it is very
necessary that the student of Greek literature should bear it constantly in
mind. A strong instance in the Iliad itself to illustrate this position, is the
passage where Jupiter laments to Juno the approaching death of Sarpedon. ‘Alas
me!’ says he ‘since it is fated (moira) that Sarpedon, dearest to me of men,
should be slain by Patroclus, the son of Menoetius! Indeed, my heart is divided
within me while I ruminate it in my mind, whether having snatched him up from
out of the lamentable battle, I should not at once place him alive in the
fertile land of his own Lycia, or whether I should now destroy him by the hands
of the son of Menoetius!’ To which Juno answers—‘Dost thou mean to rescue from
death a mortal man, long since destined by fate (palai pepromenon)? You may do
it—but we, the rest of the gods, do not sanction it.’ Here it is clear from both
speakers, that although Sarpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupiter might
still, if he pleased, save him, and place him entirely out of the reach of any
such event, and further, in the alternative, that Jupiter himself would destroy
him by the hands of another.”—Coleridge, p. 156. seq. [246] _Thrice at the
battlements_. “The art military of the Homeric age is upon a level with the
state of navigation just described, personal prowess decided every thing; the
night attack and the ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large
scale. The chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights of
romance. The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a captain in the
guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a ditch or any other line or
work round the town, and the wall itself was accessible without a ladder. It was
probably a vast mound of earth with a declivity outwards. Patroclus thrice
mounts it in armour. The Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive
assistance from their allies to the very end.”—Coleridge, p. 212. [247]
_Ciconians_.—A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus. [248] _They wept_.“Fast by the
manger stands the inactive steed,And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head;He
stands, and careless of his golden grain,Weeps his associates and his master
slain.”Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.“Nothing is heard upon the mountains
now,But pensive herds that for their master low,Straggling and comfortless about
they rove,Unmindful of their pasture and their love.”Moschus, id. 3, parodied,
_ibid._“To close the pomp, Æthon, the steed of state,Is led, the funeral of his
lord to wait.Stripp’d of his trappings, with a sullen paceHe walks, and the big
tears run rolling down his face.”Dryden’s Virgil, bk. ii [249] _Some brawny
bull_.“Like to a bull, that with impetuous springDarts, at the moment when the
fatal blowHath struck him, but unable to proceedPlunges on either side.”—Carey’s
Dante: Hell, c. xii. [250] This is connected with the earlier part of last book,
the regular narrative being interrupted by the message of Antilochus and the
lamentations of Achilles. [251] _Far in the deep_. So Oceanus hears the
lamentations of Prometheus, in the play of Æschylus, and comes from the depths
of the sea to comfort him. [252] Opuntia, a city of Locris. [253] Quintus
Calaber, lib. v., has attempted to rival Homer in his description of the shield
of the same hero. A few extracts from Mr. Dyce’s version (Select Translations,
p. 104, seq.) may here be introduced.“In the wide circle of the shield were
seenRefulgent images of various forms,The work of Vulcan; who had there
describedThe heaven, the ether, and the earth and sea,The winds, the clouds, the
moon, the sun, apartIn different stations; and you there might viewThe stars
that gem the still-revolving heaven,And, under them, the vast expanse of air,In
which, with outstretch’d wings, the long-beak’d birdWinnow’d the gale, as if
instinct with life.Around the shield the waves of ocean flow’d,The realms of
Tethys, which unnumber’d streams,In azure mazes rolling o’er the earth,Seem’d to
augment.” [254] _On seats of stone_. “Several of the old northern Sagas
represent the old men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting on great
stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsring”— Grote, ii. p. 100,
note. On the independence of the judicial office in The heroic times, see
Thirlwall’s Greece, vol. i. p. 166. [255] _Another part_, &c.“And hereWere
horrid wars depicted; grimly paleWere heroes lying with their slaughter’d
steedsUpon the ground incarnadin’d with blood.Stern stalked Bellona, smear’d
with reeking gore,Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen,And Terror,
Discord to the fatal strifeInciting men, and Furies breathing flames:Nor absent
were the Fates, and the tall shapeOf ghastly Death, round whom did Battles
throng,Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat;And Gorgons, whose long
locks were twisting snakes.That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.Such
were the horrors of dire war.”—Dyce’s Calaber. [256] _A field deep
furrowed_.“Here was a corn field; reapers in a row,Each with a sharp-tooth’d
sickle in his hand,Work’d busily, and, as the harvest fell,Others were ready
still to bind the sheaves:Yoked to a wain that bore the corn awayThe steers were
moving; sturdy bullocks hereThe plough were drawing, and the furrow’d glebeWas
black behind them, while with goading wandThe active youths impell’d them. Here
a feastWas graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyreA band of blooming virgins
led the dance.As if endued with life.”—Dyce’s Calaber. [257] Coleridge (Greek
Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently compared this with the description
of the shield of Hercules by Hesiod. He remarks that, “with two or three
exceptions, the imagery differs in little more than the names and arrangements;
and the difference of arrangement in the Shield of Hercules is altogether for
the worse. The natural consecution of the Homeric images needs no exposition: it
constitutes in itself one of the beauties of the work. The Hesiodic images are
huddled together without connection or congruity: Mars and Pallas are awkwardly
introduced among the Centaurs and Lapithae;— but the gap is wide indeed between
them and Apollo with the Muses, waking the echoes of Olympus to celestial
harmonies; whence however, we are hurried back to Perseus, the Gorgons, and
other images of war, over an arm of the sea, in which the sporting dolphins, the
fugitive fishes, and the fisherman on the shore with his casting net, are
minutely represented. As to the Hesiodic images themselves, the leading remark
is, that they catch at beauty by ornament, and at sublimity by exaggeration; and
upon the untenable supposition of the genuineness of this poem, there is this
curious peculiarity, that, in the description of scenes of rustic peace, the
superiority of Homer is decisive—while in those of war and tumult it may be
thought, perhaps, that the Hesiodic poet has more than once the advantage.”
[258] “This legend is one of the most pregnant and characteristic in the Grecian
Mythology; it explains, according to the religious ideas familiar to the old
epic poets, both the distinguishing attributes and the endless toil and
endurances of Heracles, the most renowned subjugator of all the semi-divine
personages worshipped by the Hellenes,—a being of irresistible force, and
especially beloved by Zeus, yet condemned constantly to labour for others and to
obey the commands of a worthless and cowardly persecutor. His recompense is
reserved to the close of his career, when his afflicting trials are brought to a
close: he is then admitted to the godhead, and receives in marriage
Hebe.”—Grote, vol. i. p. 128. [259] _Ambrosia_.“The blue-eyed maid,In ev’ry
breast new vigour to infuse.Brings nectar temper’d with ambrosial
dews.”Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, vi. 249. [260] “Hell is naked before him, and
destruction hath no covering. He stretcheth out the north over the empty place,
and hangeth the earth upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick
clouds; and the cloud is not rent under them.” Job xxvi. 6-8. [261]“Swift from
his throne the infernal monarch ran,All pale and trembling, lest the race of
man,v Slain by Jove’s wrath,and led by Hermes’ rod,Should fill (a countless
throng!) his dark abode.”Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq. [262] These words
seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might be delayed, but never wholly
set aside. [263] It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal,
to behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22. [264]“Ere Ilium and the
Trojan tow’rs arose,In humble vales they built their soft abodes.”Dryden’s
Virgil, iii. 150. [265] _Along the level seas_. Compare Virgil’s description of
Camilla, who“Outstripp’d the winds in speed upon the plain,Flew o’er the field,
nor hurt the bearded grain:She swept the seas, and, as she skimm’d along,Her
flying feet unbathed on billows hung.”Dryden, vii. 1100. [266] _The future
father_. “Æneas and Antenor stand distinguished from the other Trojans by a
dissatisfaction with Priam, and a sympathy with the Greeks, which is by
Sophocles and others construed as treacherous collusion,—a suspicion indirectly
glanced at, though emphatically repelled, in the Æneas of Virgil.”—Grote, i. p.
427. [267] Neptune thus recounts his services to Æneas:“When your Æneas fought,
but fought with oddsOf force unequal, and unequal gods:I spread a cloud before
the victor’s sight,Sustain’d the vanquish’d, and secured his flight—Even then
secured him, when I sought with joyThe vow’d destruction of ungrateful
Troy.”Dryden’s Virgil, v. 1058. [268] _On Polydore_. Euripides, Virgil, and
others, relate that Polydore was sent into Thrace, to the house of Polymestor,
for protection, being the youngest of Priam’s sons, and that he was
treacherously murdered by his host for the sake of the treasure sent with him.
[269] “Perhaps the boldest excursion of Homer into this region of poetical fancy
is the collision into which, in the twenty-first of the Iliad, he has brought
the river god Scamander, first with Achilles, and afterwards with Vulcan, when
summoned by Juno to the hero’s aid. The overwhelming fury of the stream finds
the natural interpretation in the character of the mountain torrents of Greece
and Asia Minor. Their wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as
to be easily forded by the foot passenger. But a thunder-shower in the
mountains, unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may suddenly
immerse him in the flood of a mighty river. The rescue of Achilles by the fiery
arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same ready explanation from physical
causes. Yet the subsiding of the flood at the critical moment when the hero’s
destruction appeared imminent, might, by a slight extension of the figurative
parallel, be ascribed to a god symbolic of the influences opposed to all
atmospheric moisture.”—Mure, vol. i. p. 480, sq. [270] Wood has observed, that
“the circumstance of a falling tree, which is described as reaching from one of
its banks to the other, affords a very just idea of the breadth of the
Scamander.” [271] _Ignominious_. Drowning, as compared with a death in the field
of battle, was considered utterly disgraceful. [272] _Beneath a caldron_.“So,
when with crackling flames a caldron fries,The bubbling waters from the bottom
rise.Above the brims they force their fiery way;Black vapours climb aloft, and
cloud the day.”Dryden’s Virgil, vii. 644. [273] “This tale of the temporary
servitude of particular gods, by order of Jove, as a punishment for
misbehaviour, recurs not unfrequently among the incidents of the Mythical
world.”—Grote, vol. i. p. 156. [274] _Not half so dreadful_.“On the other
side,Incensed with indignation, Satan stoodUnterrified, and like a comet
burn’d,That fires the length of Ophiuchus hugeIn the arctic sky, and from his
horrid hairShakes pestilence and war.”—“Paradise Lost,” xi. 708. [275] “And thus
his own undaunted mind explores.”—“Paradise Lost,” vi. 113. [276] The example of
Nausicaa, in the Odyssey, proves that the duties of the laundry were not thought
derogatory, even from the dignity of a princess, in the heroic times. [277]
_Hesper shines with keener light_.“Fairest of stars, last in the train of
night,If better thou belong not to the dawn.”“Paradise Lost,” v. 166. [278] Such
was his fate. After chasing the Trojans into the town, he was slain by an arrow
from the quiver of Paris, directed under the unerring auspices of Apollo. The
greatest efforts were made by the Trojans to possess themselves of the body,
which was however rescued and borne off to the Grecian camp by the valour of
Ajax and Ulysses. Thetis stole away the body, just as the Greeks were about to
burn it with funeral honours, and conveyed it away to a renewed life of
immortality in the isle of Leuke in the Euxine. [279] _Astyanax_, i.e. the
_city-king_ or guardian. It is amusing that Plato, who often finds fault with
Homer without reason, should have copied this twaddling etymology into his
Cratylus. [280] This book has been closely imitated by Virgil in his fifth book,
but it is almost useless to attempt a selection of passages for comparison.
[281] _Thrice in order led_. This was a frequent rite at funerals. The Romans
had the same custom, which they called _decursio_. Plutarch states that
Alexander, in after times, renewed these same honours to the memory of Achilles
himself. [282] _And swore_. Literally, and called Orcus, the god of oaths, to
witness. See Buttmann, Lexilog, p. 436. [283]“O, long expected by thy friends!
from whenceArt thou so late return’d for our defence?Do we behold thee, wearied
as we areWith length of labours, and with, toils of war?After so many funerals
of thy own,Art thou restored to thy declining town?But say, what wounds are
these? what new disgraceDeforms the manly features of thy face?”Dryden, xi. 369.
[284] _Like a thin smoke_. Virgil, Georg. iv. 72.“In vain I reach my feeble
hands to joinIn sweet embraces—ah! no longer thine!She said, and from his eyes
the fleeting fairRetired, like subtle smoke dissolved in air.”Dryden. [285] So
Milton:—“So eagerly the fiendO’er bog, o’er steep, through strait, rough, dense,
or rare,With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,And swims, or sinks, or
wades, or creeps, or flies.”“Paradise Lost,” ii. 948. [286]“An ancient forest,
for the work design’d(The shady covert of the savage kind).The Trojans found:
the sounding axe is placed:Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the tow’ring
prideOf forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,And piercing wedges cleave the
stubborn oak.High trunks of trees, fell’d from the steepy crownOf the bare
mountains, roll with ruin down.”Dryden’s Virgil, vi. 261. [287] _He vowed_. This
was a very ancient custom. [288] The height of the tomb or pile was a great
proof of the dignity of the deceased, and the honour in which he was held. [289]
On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern nations, see Mallet,
p. 213. [290] _And calls the spirit_. Such was the custom anciently, even at the
Roman funerals.“Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,Paternal ashes, now revived in
vain.”Dryden’s Virgil, v. 106. [291] Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished,
has drawn a better moral from this episode than Homer. The following lines
deserve comparison:—“The haughty Dares in the lists appears:Walking he strides,
his head erected bears:His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,And loud
applauses echo through the field.* * * *Such Dares was, and such he strode
along,And drew the wonder of the gazing throngHis brawny breast and ample chest
he shows;His lifted arms around his head he throws,And deals in whistling air
his empty blows.His match is sought, but, through the trembling band,No one
dares answer to the proud demand.Presuming of his force, with sparkling
eyes,Already he devours the promised prize.* * * *If none my matchless valour
dares oppose,How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?”Dryden’s Virgil, v.
486, seq. [292]“The gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shoreHis faithful
friends unhappy Dares bore:His mouth and nostrils pour’d a purple flood,And
pounded teeth came rushing with his blood.”Dryden’s Virgil, v. 623. [293]
“Troilus is only once named in the Iliad; he was mentioned also in the Cypriad
but his youth, beauty, and untimely end made him an object of great interest
with the subsequent poets.”—Grote, i, p. 399. [294] Milton has rivalled this
passage describing the descent of Gabriel, “Paradise Lost,” bk. v. 266,
seq.“Down thither prone in flightHe speeds, and through the vast ethereal
skySails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,Now on the polar winds,
then with quick fanWinnows the buxom air. * * * ** * * *At once on th’ eastern
cliff of ParadiseHe lights, and to his proper shape returnsA seraph wing’d. * *
* *Like Maia’s son he stood,And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance
fill’dThe circuit wide.”Virgil, Æn. iv. 350:—“Hermes obeys; with golden pinions
bindsHis flying feet, and mounts the western winds:And whether o’er the seas or
earth he flies,With rapid force they bear him down the skiesBut first he grasps
within his awful handThe mark of sovereign power, his magic wand;With this he
draws the ghost from hollow graves;With this he drives them from the Stygian
waves:* * * *Thus arm’d, the god begins his airy race,v And drives the
rackingclouds along the liquid space.”Dryden. [295] In reference to the whole
scene that follows, the remarks of Coleridge are well worth reading:— “By a
close study of life, and by a true and natural mode of expressing everything,
Homer was enabled to venture upon the most peculiar and difficult situations,
and to extricate himself from them with the completest success. The whole scene
between Achilles and Priam, when the latter comes to the Greek camp for the
purpose of redeeming the body of Hector, is at once the most profoundly skilful,
and yet the simplest and most affecting passage in the Iliad. Quinctilian has
taken notice of the following speech of Priam, the rhetorical artifice of which
is so transcendent, that if genius did not often, especially in oratory,
unconsciously fulfil the most subtle precepts of criticism, we might be induced,
on this account alone, to consider the last book of the Iliad as what is called
spurious, in other words, of later date than the rest of the poem. Observe the
exquisite taste of Priam in occupying the mind of Achilles, from the outset,
with the image of his father; in gradually introducing the parallel of his own
situation; and, lastly, mentioning Hector’s name when he perceives that the hero
is softened, and then only in such a manner as to flatter the pride of the
conqueror. The ego d’eleeinoteros per, and the apusato aecha geronta, are not
exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the Iliad. They are almost too
fine and pathetic. The whole passage defies translation, for there is that about
the Greek which has no name, but which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety
that it can only be felt in the original, and is lost in an attempt to transfuse
it into another language.”—Coleridge, p. 195. [296] “Achilles’ ferocious
treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot but offend as referred to the modern
standard of humanity. The heroic age, however, must be judged by its own moral
laws. Retributive vengeance on the dead, as well as the living, was a duty
inculcated by the religion of those barbarous times which not only taught that
evil inflicted on the author of evil was a solace to the injured man; but made
the welfare of the soul after death dependent on the fate of the body from which
it had separated. Hence a denial of the rites essential to the soul’s admission
into the more favoured regions of the lower world was a cruel punishment to the
wanderer on the dreary shores of the infernal river. The complaint of the ghost
of Patroclus to Achilles, of but a brief postponement of his own obsequies,
shows how efficacious their refusal to the remains of his destroyer must have
been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which, even after death, was supposed
to torment the dwellers in Hades. Hence before yielding up the body of Hector to
Priam, Achilles asks pardon of Patroclus for even this partial cession of his
just rights of retribution.”—Mure, vol. i. 289. [297] Such was the fate of
Astyanax, when Troy was taken.“Here, from the tow’r by stern Ulysses
thrown,Andromache bewail’d her infant son.”Merrick’s Tryphiodorus, v. 675. [298]
The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant and interesting
view of Helen’s character— “Few things are more interesting than to observe how
the same hand that has given us the fury and inconsistency of Achilles, gives us
also the consummate elegance and tenderness of Helen. She is through the Iliad a
genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech, noble in her associations, full of
remorse for a fault for which higher powers seem responsible, yet grateful and
affectionate towards those with whom that fault had committed her. I have always
thought the following speech in which Helen laments Hector, and hints at her own
invidious and unprotected situation in Troy, as almost the sweetest passage in
the poem. It is another striking instance of that refinement of feeling and
softness of tone which so generally distinguish the last book of the Iliad from
the rest.”—Classic Poets, p. 198, seq. [299] “And here we part with Achilles at
the moment best calculated to exalt and purify our impression of his character.
We had accompanied him through the effervescence, undulations, and final
subsidence of his stormy passions. We now leave him in repose and under the full
influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of his great
qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a few short days the
mighty being in whom they were united was himself to be suddenly cut off in the
full vigour of their exercise. The frequent and touching allusions, interspersed
throughout the Iliad, to the speedy termination of its hero’s course, and the
moral on the vanity of human life which they indicate, are among the finest
evidences of the spirit of ethic unity by which the whole framework of the poem
is united.”—Mure, vol. i. p 201. [300] Cowper says,—“I cannot take my leave of
this noble poem without expressing how much I am struck with the plain
conclusion of it. It is like the exit of a great man out of company, whom he has
entertained magnificently; neither pompous nor familiar; not contemptuous, yet
without much ceremony.” Coleridge, p. 227, considers the termination of
“Paradise Lost” somewhat similar. *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE
ILIAD *** Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe
renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S.
copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without
permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in
the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing
ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if
you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license,
including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do
not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark
license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as
creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research.
ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you maydo
practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S.
copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially
commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG
LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the
Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic
works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any
way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms
of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online
atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing
Project Gutenberg™electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this
Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand,
agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual
property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for
obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do
not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund
from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on
or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most
Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of
this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do
with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
(“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the
collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work
is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the
United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing,
performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long
asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you
will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to
electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping
this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License
whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place
where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws
in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the
United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of
thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing
or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™
work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of
any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed
all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active
links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must
appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or
distributed: This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the
Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to
check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts
not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it
is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If
you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase
“ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must
complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain
permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™
electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use
and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be
linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission
of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink
or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or
any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with
Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or
redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work,
withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1
withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™
License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any
binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the
official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no
additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting
a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull
Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge
a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any
Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that: • You pay a
royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project
Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your
applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required
to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked
as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money
paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of
receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access
to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works. • You provide, in accordance with
paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement
copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you
within 90 days of receipt of the work. • You comply with all other terms of this
agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works. 1.E.9. If you wish
to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of
works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain
permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the
manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth
in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend
considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and
proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the
ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project
Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored,
maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or
computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED
WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund”
described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a
ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to
you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU
HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL
NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover
adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a
refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to
the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical
medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or
entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a
replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically,
the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a
secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe
second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further
opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of
replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you
‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable
to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum
disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity
orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void
theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the
Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation,
anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with
this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and
distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability,
costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor
any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or
deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2.
Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is
synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by
the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new
computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and
donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to
provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project
Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can
help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a
non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The
Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax
deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s
laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at
www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project
GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot
survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission
ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely
distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The
Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and
charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance
requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork
and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit
donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of
compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not
solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation
requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations
from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International
donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning
tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws
alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for
current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of
otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate,
please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.Section 5. General Information About
Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator
of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could
befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which
are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice
is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any
particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG
searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about
Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg
LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how
tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes This ebook is
for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the
world at no cost and with almost no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it,
give it away or re-use it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License
included with this ebook or onlineat www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located
in the United States,you will have to check the laws of the country where you
are locatedbefore using this eBook.Title: The Adventures of Sherlock
HolmesAuthor: Arthur Conan DoyleRelease date: March 1, 1999 [eBook #1661] Most
recently updated: October 10, 2023Language: EnglishCredits: an anonymous Project
Gutenberg volunteer and Jose Menendez*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK
THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***The Adventures of Sherlock Holmesby Arthur
Conan DoyleContents I. A Scandal in Bohemia II. The Red-Headed League III. A
Case of Identity IV. The Boscombe Valley Mystery V. The Five Orange Pips VI. The
Man with the Twisted Lip VII. The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle VIII. The
Adventure of the Speckled Band IX. The Adventure of the Engineer’s Thumb X. The
Adventure of the Noble Bachelor XI. The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet XII. The
Adventure of the Copper BeechesI. A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIAI.To Sherlock Holmes she
is always _the_ woman. I have seldom heard himmention her under any other name.
In his eyes she eclipses andpredominates the whole of her sex. It was not that
he felt any emotionakin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that one
particularly,were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirably balanced mind.
Hewas, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine thatthe world
has seen, but as a lover he would have placed himself in afalse position. He
never spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibeand a sneer. They were
admirable things for the observer—excellent fordrawing the veil from men’s
motives and actions. But for the trainedreasoner to admit such intrusions into
his own delicate and finelyadjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting
factor which mightthrow a doubt upon all his mental results. Grit in a
sensitiveinstrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, would notbe
more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his. Andyet there was
but one woman to him, and that woman was the late IreneAdler, of dubious and
questionable memory.I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted
us awayfrom each other. My own complete happiness, and the home-centredinterests
which rise up around the man who first finds himself masterof his own
establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention,while Holmes, who
loathed every form of society with his whole Bohemiansoul, remained in our
lodgings in Baker Street, buried among his oldbooks, and alternating from week
to week between cocaine and ambition,the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce
energy of his own keennature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the
study of crime,and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powers
ofobservation in following out those clues, and clearing up thosemysteries which
had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police.From time to time I heard
some vague account of his doings: of hissummons to Odessa in the case of the
Trepoff murder, of his clearing upof the singular tragedy of the Atkinson
brothers at Trincomalee, andfinally of the mission which he had accomplished so
delicately andsuccessfully for the reigning family of Holland. Beyond these
signs ofhis activity, however, which I merely shared with all the readers ofthe
daily press, I knew little of my former friend and companion.One night—it was on
the twentieth of March, 1888—I was returning from ajourney to a patient (for I
had now returned to civil practice), whenmy way led me through Baker Street. As
I passed the well-remembereddoor, which must always be associated in my mind
with my wooing, andwith the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was seized
with akeen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing
hisextraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as Ilooked
up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouetteagainst the
blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with hishead sunk upon his chest
and his hands clasped behind him. To me, whoknew his every mood and habit, his
attitude and manner told their ownstory. He was at work again. He had risen out
of his drug-createddreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang
the belland was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in part my
own.His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think,to see
me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he wavedme to an armchair,
threw across his case of cigars, and indicated aspirit case and a gasogene in
the corner. Then he stood before the fireand looked me over in his singular
introspective fashion.“Wedlock suits you,” he remarked. “I think, Watson, that
you have puton seven and a half pounds since I saw you.”“Seven!” I
answered.“Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more,
Ifancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell methat you
intended to go into harness.”“Then, how do you know?”“I see it, I deduce it. How
do I know that you have been gettingyourself very wet lately, and that you have
a most clumsy and carelessservant girl?”“My dear Holmes,” said I, “this is too
much. You would certainly havebeen burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It
is true that I had acountry walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess,
but as Ihave changed my clothes I can’t imagine how you deduce it. As to
MaryJane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but
there,again, I fail to see how you work it out.”He chuckled to himself and
rubbed his long, nervous hands together.“It is simplicity itself,” said he; “my
eyes tell me that on the insideof your left shoe, just where the firelight
strikes it, the leather isscored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they
have been caused bysomeone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of
the sole inorder to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my
doublededuction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had
aparticularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey. Asto your
practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling ofiodoform, with a black
mark of nitrate of silver upon his rightforefinger, and a bulge on the right
side of his top-hat to show wherehe has secreted his stethoscope, I must be
dull, indeed, if I do notpronounce him to be an active member of the medical
profession.”I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained
hisprocess of deduction. “When I hear you give your reasons,” I remarked,“the
thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that Icould easily do it
myself, though at each successive instance of yourreasoning I am baffled until
you explain your process. And yet Ibelieve that my eyes are as good as
yours.”“Quite so,” he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himselfdown
into an armchair. “You see, but you do not observe. Thedistinction is clear. For
example, you have frequently seen the stepswhich lead up from the hall to this
room.”“Frequently.”“How often?”“Well, some hundreds of times.”“Then how many are
there?”“How many? I don’t know.”“Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you
have seen. That is justmy point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps,
because I haveboth seen and observed. By the way, since you are interested in
theselittle problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or twoof my
trifling experiences, you may be interested in this.” He threwover a sheet of
thick, pink-tinted notepaper which had been lying openupon the table. “It came
by the last post,” said he. “Read it aloud.”The note was undated, and without
either signature or address.“There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to
eight o’clock,” itsaid, “a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of
the verydeepest moment. Your recent services to one of the royal houses ofEurope
have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted withmatters which are of
an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.This account of you we have from
all quarters received. Be in yourchamber then at that hour, and do not take it
amiss if your visitorwear a mask.”“This is indeed a mystery,” I remarked. “What
do you imagine that itmeans?”“I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to
theorise before one hasdata. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit
theories, instead oftheories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you
deduce fromit?”I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it
waswritten.“The man who wrote it was presumably well to do,” I
remarked,endeavouring to imitate my companion’s processes. “Such paper could
notbe bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly strong
andstiff.”“Peculiar—that is the very word,” said Holmes. “It is not an
Englishpaper at all. Hold it up to the light.”I did so, and saw a large “E” with
a small “g,” a “P,” and a large “G”with a small “t” woven into the texture of
the paper.“What do you make of that?” asked Holmes.“The name of the maker, no
doubt; or his monogram, rather.”“Not at all. The ‘G’ with the small ‘t’ stands
for ‘Gesellschaft,’which is the German for ‘Company.’ It is a customary
contraction likeour ‘Co.’ ‘P,’ of course, stands for ‘Papier.’ Now for the ‘Eg.’
Let usglance at our Continental Gazetteer.” He took down a heavy brown
volumefrom his shelves. “Eglow, Eglonitz—here we are, Egria. It is in
aGerman-speaking country—in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad. ‘Remarkableas being
the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerousglass-factories and
paper-mills.’ Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make ofthat?” His eyes sparkled, and
he sent up a great blue triumphant cloudfrom his cigarette.“The paper was made
in Bohemia,” I said.“Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do
you note thepeculiar construction of the sentence—‘This account of you we have
fromall quarters received.’ A Frenchman or Russian could not have writtenthat.
It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs. It onlyremains, therefore,
to discover what is wanted by this German whowrites upon Bohemian paper and
prefers wearing a mask to showing hisface. And here he comes, if I am not
mistaken, to resolve all ourdoubts.”As he spoke there was the sharp sound of
horses’ hoofs and gratingwheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at
the bell. Holmeswhistled.“A pair, by the sound,” said he. “Yes,” he continued,
glancing out ofthe window. “A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A
hundredand fifty guineas apiece. There’s money in this case, Watson, if thereis
nothing else.”“I think that I had better go, Holmes.”“Not a bit, Doctor. Stay
where you are. I am lost without my Boswell.And this promises to be interesting.
It would be a pity to miss it.”“But your client—”“Never mind him. I may want
your help, and so may he. Here he comes.Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and
give us your best attention.”A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon
the stairs and in thepassage, paused immediately outside the door. Then there
was a loud andauthoritative tap.“Come in!” said Holmes.A man entered who could
hardly have been less than six feet six inchesin height, with the chest and
limbs of a Hercules. His dress was richwith a richness which would, in England,
be looked upon as akin to badtaste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across
the sleeves andfronts of his double-breasted coat, while the deep blue cloak
which wasthrown over his shoulders was lined with flame-coloured silk andsecured
at the neck with a brooch which consisted of a single flamingberyl. Boots which
extended halfway up his calves, and which weretrimmed at the tops with rich
brown fur, completed the impression ofbarbaric opulence which was suggested by
his whole appearance. Hecarried a broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore
across the upperpart of his face, extending down past the cheekbones, a black
vizardmask, which he had apparently adjusted that very moment, for his handwas
still raised to it as he entered. From the lower part of the facehe appeared to
be a man of strong character, with a thick, hanging lip,and a long, straight
chin suggestive of resolution pushed to the lengthof obstinacy.“You had my
note?” he asked with a deep harsh voice and a stronglymarked German accent. “I
told you that I would call.” He looked fromone to the other of us, as if
uncertain which to address.“Pray take a seat,” said Holmes. “This is my friend
and colleague, Dr.Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my
cases. Whomhave I the honour to address?”“You may address me as the Count Von
Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. Iunderstand that this gentleman, your friend, is a
man of honour anddiscretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most
extremeimportance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with youalone.”I
rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back intomy chair.
“It is both, or none,” said he. “You may say before thisgentleman anything which
you may say to me.”The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. “Then I must begin,”
said he,“by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the end
ofthat time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is not toomuch to
say that it is of such weight it may have an influence uponEuropean history.”“I
promise,” said Holmes.“And I.”“You will excuse this mask,” continued our strange
visitor. “The augustperson who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you,
and I mayconfess at once that the title by which I have just called myself isnot
exactly my own.”“I was aware of it,” said Holmes dryly.“The circumstances are of
great delicacy, and every precaution has tobe taken to quench what might grow to
be an immense scandal andseriously compromise one of the reigning families of
Europe. To speakplainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein,
hereditarykings of Bohemia.”“I was also aware of that,” murmured Holmes,
settling himself down inhis armchair and closing his eyes.Our visitor glanced
with some apparent surprise at the languid,lounging figure of the man who had
been no doubt depicted to him as themost incisive reasoner and most energetic
agent in Europe. Holmesslowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his
gigantic client.“If your Majesty would condescend to state your case,” he
remarked, “Ishould be better able to advise you.”The man sprang from his chair
and paced up and down the room inuncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture
of desperation, he torethe mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground.
“You are right,”he cried; “I am the King. Why should I attempt to conceal
it?”“Why, indeed?” murmured Holmes. “Your Majesty had not spoken before Iwas
aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond vonOrmstein, Grand Duke
of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King ofBohemia.”“But you can understand,”
said our strange visitor, sitting down oncemore and passing his hand over his
high white forehead, “you canunderstand that I am not accustomed to doing such
business in my ownperson. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not
confide it toan agent without putting myself in his power. I have come
_incognito_from Prague for the purpose of consulting you.”“Then, pray consult,”
said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.“The facts are briefly these: Some five
years ago, during a lengthyvisit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the
well-known adventuress,Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to
you.”“Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor,” murmured Holmes withoutopening
his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketingall paragraphs
concerning men and things, so that it was difficult toname a subject or a person
on which he could not at once furnishinformation. In this case I found her
biography sandwiched in betweenthat of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a
staff-commander who had written amonograph upon the deep-sea fishes.“Let me
see!” said Holmes. “Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858.Contralto—hum! La
Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw—yes!Retired from operatic
stage—ha! Living in London—quite so! YourMajesty, as I understand, became
entangled with this young person,wrote her some compromising letters, and is now
desirous of gettingthose letters back.”“Precisely so. But how—”“Was there a
secret marriage?”“None.”“No legal papers or certificates?”“None.”“Then I fail to
follow your Majesty. If this young person shouldproduce her letters for
blackmailing or other purposes, how is she toprove their authenticity?”“There is
the writing.”“Pooh, pooh! Forgery.”“My private note-paper.”“Stolen.”“My own
seal.”“Imitated.”“My photograph.”“Bought.”“We were both in the photograph.”“Oh,
dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed anindiscretion.”“I was
mad—insane.”“You have compromised yourself seriously.”“I was only Crown Prince
then. I was young. I am but thirty now.”“It must be recovered.”“We have tried
and failed.”“Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought.”“She will not
sell.”“Stolen, then.”“Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay
ransacked herhouse. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she
hasbeen waylaid. There has been no result.”“No sign of it?”“Absolutely
none.”Holmes laughed. “It is quite a pretty little problem,” said he.“But a very
serious one to me,” returned the King reproachfully.“Very, indeed. And what does
she propose to do with the photograph?”“To ruin me.”“But how?”“I am about to be
married.”“So I have heard.”“To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second
daughter of the King ofScandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her
family. She isherself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my
conductwould bring the matter to an end.”“And Irene Adler?”“Threatens to send
them the photograph. And she will do it. I know thatshe will do it. You do not
know her, but she has a soul of steel. Shehas the face of the most beautiful of
women, and the mind of the mostresolute of men. Rather than I should marry
another woman, there are nolengths to which she would not go—none.”“You are sure
that she has not sent it yet?”“I am sure.”“And why?”“Because she has said that
she would send it on the day when thebetrothal was publicly proclaimed. That
will be next Monday.”“Oh, then we have three days yet,” said Holmes with a yawn.
“That isvery fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look
intojust at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for
thepresent?”“Certainly. You will find me at the Langham under the name of the
CountVon Kramm.”“Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we
progress.”“Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety.”“Then, as to money?”“You have
_carte blanche_.”“Absolutely?”“I tell you that I would give one of the provinces
of my kingdom tohave that photograph.”“And for present expenses?”The King took a
heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak and laidit on the table.“There
are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes,” hesaid.Holmes
scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and handed itto him.“And
Mademoiselle’s address?” he asked.“Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St.
John’s Wood.”Holmes took a note of it. “One other question,” said he. “Was
thephotograph a cabinet?”“It was.”“Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust
that we shall soon havesome good news for you. And good-night, Watson,” he
added, as thewheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. “If you will
begood enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three o’clock I should liketo chat
this little matter over with you.”II.At three o’clock precisely I was at Baker
Street, but Holmes had notyet returned. The landlady informed me that he had
left the houseshortly after eight o’clock in the morning. I sat down beside the
fire,however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long he might be.I was
already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, though it wassurrounded by none
of the grim and strange features which wereassociated with the two crimes which
I have already recorded, still,the nature of the case and the exalted station of
his client gave it acharacter of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of
theinvestigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in hismasterly
grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, whichmade it a pleasure
to me to study his system of work, and to follow thequick, subtle methods by
which he disentangled the most inextricablemysteries. So accustomed was I to his
invariable success that the verypossibility of his failing had ceased to enter
into my head.It was close upon four before the door opened, and a
drunken-lookinggroom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face
anddisreputable clothes, walked into the room. Accustomed as I was to myfriend’s
amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look threetimes before I was
certain that it was indeed he. With a nod hevanished into the bedroom, whence he
emerged in five minutestweed-suited and respectable, as of old. Putting his
hands into hispockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and
laughedheartily for some minutes.“Well, really!” he cried, and then he choked
and laughed again until hewas obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the
chair.“What is it?”“It’s quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I
employedmy morning, or what I ended by doing.”“I can’t imagine. I suppose that
you have been watching the habits, andperhaps the house, of Miss Irene
Adler.”“Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual. I will tell you, however.I
left the house a little after eight o’clock this morning in thecharacter of a
groom out of work. There is a wonderful sympathy andfreemasonry among horsey
men. Be one of them, and you will know allthat there is to know. I soon found
Briony Lodge. It is a _bijou_villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in
front right up tothe road, two stories. Chubb lock to the door. Large
sitting-room onthe right side, well furnished, with long windows almost to the
floor,and those preposterous English window fasteners which a child couldopen.
Behind there was nothing remarkable, save that the passage windowcould be
reached from the top of the coach-house. I walked round it andexamined it
closely from every point of view, but without notinganything else of interest.“I
then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that therewas a mews in a
lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. I lentthe ostlers a hand in
rubbing down their horses, and received inexchange twopence, a glass of
half-and-half, two fills of shag tobacco,and as much information as I could
desire about Miss Adler, to saynothing of half a dozen other people in the
neighbourhood in whom I wasnot in the least interested, but whose biographies I
was compelled tolisten to.”“And what of Irene Adler?” I asked.“Oh, she has
turned all the men’s heads down in that part. She is thedaintiest thing under a
bonnet on this planet. So say theSerpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly,
sings at concerts, drivesout at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for
dinner. Seldomgoes out at other times, except when she sings. Has only one
malevisitor, but a good deal of him. He is dark, handsome, and dashing,never
calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is a Mr. GodfreyNorton, of the
Inner Temple. See the advantages of a cabman as aconfidant. They had driven him
home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews,and knew all about him. When I had
listened to all they had to tell, Ibegan to walk up and down near Briony Lodge
once more, and to thinkover my plan of campaign.“This Godfrey Norton was
evidently an important factor in the matter.He was a lawyer. That sounded
ominous. What was the relation betweenthem, and what the object of his repeated
visits? Was she his client,his friend, or his mistress? If the former, she had
probablytransferred the photograph to his keeping. If the latter, it was
lesslikely. On the issue of this question depended whether I shouldcontinue my
work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to thegentleman’s chambers in the
Temple. It was a delicate point, and itwidened the field of my inquiry. I fear
that I bore you with thesedetails, but I have to let you see my little
difficulties, if you areto understand the situation.”“I am following you
closely,” I answered.“I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom
cab drove upto Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a
remarkablyhandsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustached—evidently the man of
whomI had heard. He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the cabmanto
wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door with the air ofa man who was
thoroughly at home.“He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch
glimpses ofhim in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down,
talkingexcitedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could see nothing. Presentlyhe
emerged, looking even more flurried than before. As he stepped up tothe cab, he
pulled a gold watch from his pocket and looked at itearnestly, ‘Drive like the
devil,’ he shouted, ‘first to Gross &Hankey’s in Regent Street, and then to the
Church of St. Monica in theEdgeware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twenty
minutes!’“Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not do
wellto follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, the coachmanwith
his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear, while allthe tags of his
harness were sticking out of the buckles. It hadn’tpulled up before she shot out
of the hall door and into it. I onlycaught a glimpse of her at the moment, but
she was a lovely woman, witha face that a man might die for.“‘The Church of St.
Monica, John,’ she cried, ‘and half a sovereign ifyou reach it in twenty
minutes.’“This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancing whetherI
should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her landau when acab came
through the street. The driver looked twice at such a shabbyfare, but I jumped
in before he could object. ‘The Church of St.Monica,’ said I, ‘and half a
sovereign if you reach it in twentyminutes.’ It was twenty-five minutes to
twelve, and of course it wasclear enough what was in the wind.“My cabby drove
fast. I don’t think I ever drove faster, but the otherswere there before us. The
cab and the landau with their steaming horseswere in front of the door when I
arrived. I paid the man and hurriedinto the church. There was not a soul there
save the two whom I hadfollowed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be
expostulating withthem. They were all three standing in a knot in front of the
altar. Ilounged up the side aisle like any other idler who has dropped into
achurch. Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at the altar faced round tome, and
Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards me.“‘Thank God,’ he
cried. ‘You’ll do. Come! Come!’“‘What then?’ I asked.“‘Come, man, come, only
three minutes, or it won’t be legal.’“I was half-dragged up to the altar, and
before I knew where I was Ifound myself mumbling responses which were whispered
in my ear, andvouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally
assisting inthe secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey
Norton,bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the
gentlemanthanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while
theclergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterous positionin
which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the thought of itthat started
me laughing just now. It seems that there had been someinformality about their
license, that the clergyman absolutely refusedto marry them without a witness of
some sort, and that my luckyappearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally
out into thestreets in search of a best man. The bride gave me a sovereign, and
Imean to wear it on my watch chain in memory of the occasion.”“This is a very
unexpected turn of affairs,” said I; “and what then?”“Well, I found my plans
very seriously menaced. It looked as if thepair might take an immediate
departure, and so necessitate very promptand energetic measures on my part. At
the church door, however, theyseparated, he driving back to the Temple, and she
to her own house. ‘Ishall drive out in the park at five as usual,’ she said as
she lefthim. I heard no more. They drove away in different directions, and Iwent
off to make my own arrangements.”“Which are?”“Some cold beef and a glass of
beer,” he answered, ringing the bell. “Ihave been too busy to think of food, and
I am likely to be busier stillthis evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want
your co-operation.”“I shall be delighted.”“You don’t mind breaking the law?”“Not
in the least.”“Nor running a chance of arrest?”“Not in a good cause.”“Oh, the
cause is excellent!”“Then I am your man.”“I was sure that I might rely on
you.”“But what is it you wish?”“When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will
make it clear to you.Now,” he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that
ourlandlady had provided, “I must discuss it while I eat, for I have notmuch
time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the sceneof action. Miss
Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive atseven. We must be at Briony
Lodge to meet her.”“And what then?”“You must leave that to me. I have already
arranged what is to occur.There is only one point on which I must insist. You
must not interfere,come what may. You understand?”“I am to be neutral?”“To do
nothing whatever. There will probably be some smallunpleasantness. Do not join
in it. It will end in my being conveyedinto the house. Four or five minutes
afterwards the sitting-room windowwill open. You are to station yourself close
to that open window.”“Yes.”“You are to watch me, for I will be visible to
you.”“Yes.”“And when I raise my hand—so—you will throw into the room what I
giveyou to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire. Youquite
follow me?”“Entirely.”“It is nothing very formidable,” he said, taking a long
cigar-shapedroll from his pocket. “It is an ordinary plumber’s smoke-rocket,
fittedwith a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Your task isconfined to
that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be taken upby quite a number of
people. You may then walk to the end of thestreet, and I will rejoin you in ten
minutes. I hope that I have mademyself clear?”“I am to remain neutral, to get
near the window, to watch you, and atthe signal to throw in this object, then to
raise the cry of fire, andto wait you at the corner of the
street.”“Precisely.”“Then you may entirely rely on me.”“That is excellent. I
think, perhaps, it is almost time that I preparefor the new role I have to
play.”He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in
thecharacter of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman. Hisbroad
black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his sympatheticsmile, and general
look of peering and benevolent curiosity were suchas Mr. John Hare alone could
have equalled. It was not merely thatHolmes changed his costume. His expression,
his manner, his very soulseemed to vary with every fresh part that he assumed.
The stage lost afine actor, even as science lost an acute reasoner, when he
became aspecialist in crime.It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street,
and it stillwanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in
SerpentineAvenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted
aswe paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the comingof its
occupant. The house was just such as I had pictured it fromSherlock Holmes’
succinct description, but the locality appeared to beless private than I
expected. On the contrary, for a small street in aquiet neighbourhood, it was
remarkably animated. There was a group ofshabbily dressed men smoking and
laughing in a corner, ascissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were
flirting with anurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging
up anddown with cigars in their mouths.“You see,” remarked Holmes, as we paced
to and fro in front of thehouse, “this marriage rather simplifies matters. The
photograph becomesa double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be
as averseto its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is to its
comingto the eyes of his princess. Now the question is, Where are we to findthe
photograph?”“Where, indeed?”“It is most unlikely that she carries it about with
her. It is cabinetsize. Too large for easy concealment about a woman’s dress.
She knowsthat the King is capable of having her waylaid and searched.
Twoattempts of the sort have already been made. We may take it, then, thatshe
does not carry it about with her.”“Where, then?”“Her banker or her lawyer. There
is that double possibility. But I aminclined to think neither. Women are
naturally secretive, and they liketo do their own secreting. Why should she hand
it over to anyone else?She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not
tell whatindirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon abusiness
man. Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it withina few days. It must
be where she can lay her hands upon it. It must bein her own house.”“But it has
twice been burgled.”“Pshaw! They did not know how to look.”“But how will you
look?”“I will not look.”“What then?”“I will get her to show me.”“But she will
refuse.”“She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is
hercarriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter.”As he spoke the gleam of the
sidelights of a carriage came round thecurve of the avenue. It was a smart
little landau which rattled up tothe door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one
of the loafing men atthe corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of
earning acopper, but was elbowed away by another loafer, who had rushed up
withthe same intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which was increased bythe
two guardsmen, who took sides with one of the loungers, and by
thescissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the other side. A blow wasstruck,
and in an instant the lady, who had stepped from her carriage,was the centre of
a little knot of flushed and struggling men, whostruck savagely at each other
with their fists and sticks. Holmesdashed into the crowd to protect the lady;
but, just as he reached her,he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the
blood running freelydown his face. At his fall the guardsmen took to their heels
in onedirection and the loungers in the other, while a number of betterdressed
people, who had watched the scuffle without taking part in it,crowded in to help
the lady and to attend to the injured man. IreneAdler, as I will still call her,
had hurried up the steps; but shestood at the top with her superb figure
outlined against the lights ofthe hall, looking back into the street.“Is the
poor gentleman much hurt?” she asked.“He is dead,” cried several voices.“No, no,
there’s life in him!” shouted another. “But he’ll be gonebefore you can get him
to hospital.”“He’s a brave fellow,” said a woman. “They would have had the
lady’spurse and watch if it hadn’t been for him. They were a gang, and arough
one, too. Ah, he’s breathing now.”“He can’t lie in the street. May we bring him
in, marm?”“Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable
sofa.This way, please!”Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and
laid out in theprincipal room, while I still observed the proceedings from my
post bythe window. The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had not been drawn,so
that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I do not knowwhether he was
seized with compunction at that moment for the part hewas playing, but I know
that I never felt more heartily ashamed ofmyself in my life than when I saw the
beautiful creature against whom Iwas conspiring, or the grace and kindliness
with which she waited uponthe injured man. And yet it would be the blackest
treachery to Holmesto draw back now from the part which he had intrusted to me.
I hardenedmy heart, and took the smoke-rocket from under my ulster. After all,
Ithought, we are not injuring her. We are but preventing her frominjuring
another.Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man whois
in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window. Atthe same
instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossed myrocket into the
room with a cry of “Fire!” The word was no sooner outof my mouth than the whole
crowd of spectators, well dressed andill—gentlemen, ostlers, and servant
maids—joined in a general shriek of“Fire!” Thick clouds of smoke curled through
the room and out at theopen window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a
moment laterthe voice of Holmes from within assuring them that it was a
falsealarm. Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the cornerof
the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my friend’s armin mine, and
to get away from the scene of uproar. He walked swiftlyand in silence for some
few minutes until we had turned down one of thequiet streets which lead towards
the Edgeware Road.“You did it very nicely, Doctor,” he remarked. “Nothing could
have beenbetter. It is all right.”“You have the photograph?”“I know where it
is.”“And how did you find out?”“She showed me, as I told you she would.”“I am
still in the dark.”“I do not wish to make a mystery,” said he, laughing. “The
matter wasperfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the street
wasan accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening.”“I guessed as
much.”“Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in thepalm
of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to myface, and became a
piteous spectacle. It is an old trick.”“That also I could fathom.”“Then they
carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else couldshe do? And into her
sitting-room, which was the very room which Isuspected. It lay between that and
her bedroom, and I was determined tosee which. They laid me on a couch, I
motioned for air, they werecompelled to open the window, and you had your
chance.”“How did that help you?”“It was all-important. When a woman thinks that
her house is on fire,her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she
values most. Itis a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than once
takenadvantage of it. In the case of the Darlington Substitution Scandal itwas
of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castle business. A marriedwoman grabs at
her baby; an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box.Now it was clear to me that
our lady of to-day had nothing in the housemore precious to her than what we are
in quest of. She would rush tosecure it. The alarm of fire was admirably done.
The smoke and shoutingwere enough to shake nerves of steel. She responded
beautifully. Thephotograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above the
rightbell-pull. She was there in an instant, and I caught a glimpse of it asshe
half drew it out. When I cried out that it was a false alarm, shereplaced it,
glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I havenot seen her since. I
rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from thehouse. I hesitated whether to
attempt to secure the photograph at once;but the coachman had come in, and as he
was watching me narrowly, itseemed safer to wait. A little over-precipitance may
ruin all.”“And now?” I asked.“Our quest is practically finished. I shall call
with the Kingto-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be
showninto the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable thatwhen she
comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. It might bea satisfaction to
his Majesty to regain it with his own hands.”“And when will you call?”“At eight
in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have aclear field. Besides,
we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean acomplete change in her life and
habits. I must wire to the King withoutdelay.”We had reached Baker Street and
had stopped at the door. He wassearching his pockets for the key when someone
passing said:“Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes.”There were several people on
the pavement at the time, but the greetingappeared to come from a slim youth in
an ulster who had hurried by.“I’ve heard that voice before,” said Holmes,
staring down the dimly litstreet. “Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have
been.”III.I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our
toastand coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed into theroom.“You
have really got it!” he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by eithershoulder and
looking eagerly into his face.“Not yet.”“But you have hopes?”“I have
hopes.”“Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone.”“We must have a cab.”“No, my
brougham is waiting.”“Then that will simplify matters.” We descended and started
off oncemore for Briony Lodge.“Irene Adler is married,” remarked
Holmes.“Married! When?”“Yesterday.”“But to whom?”“To an English lawyer named
Norton.”“But she could not love him.”“I am in hopes that she does.”“And why in
hopes?”“Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. Ifthe
lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty. If she doesnot love your
Majesty, there is no reason why she should interfere withyour Majesty’s
plan.”“It is true. And yet—! Well! I wish she had been of my own station!What a
queen she would have made!” He relapsed into a moody silence,which was not
broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.The door of Briony Lodge was open,
and an elderly woman stood upon thesteps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as
we stepped from thebrougham.“Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?” said she.“I am Mr.
Holmes,” answered my companion, looking at her with aquestioning and rather
startled gaze.“Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She
leftthis morning with her husband by the 5:15 train from Charing Cross forthe
Continent.”“What!” Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin
andsurprise. “Do you mean that she has left England?”“Never to return.”“And the
papers?” asked the King hoarsely. “All is lost.”“We shall see.” He pushed past
the servant and rushed into thedrawing-room, followed by the King and myself.
The furniture wasscattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and
opendrawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her
flight.Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding shutter,
and,plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a letter. Thephotograph
was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress, the letter wassuperscribed to
“Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for.” Myfriend tore it open, and
we all three read it together. It was dated atmidnight of the preceding night
and ran in this way: “MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—You really did it very well.
You took me in completely. Until after the alarm of fire, I had not a suspicion.
But then, when I found how I had betrayed myself, I began to think. I had been
warned against you months ago. I had been told that, if the King employed an
agent, it would certainly be you. And your address had been given me. Yet, with
all this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even after I became
suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind old clergyman.
But, you know, I have been trained as an actress myself. Male costume is nothing
new to me. I often take advantage of the freedom which it gives. I sent John,
the coachman, to watch you, ran upstairs, got into my walking clothes, as I call
them, and came down just as you departed. “Well, I followed you to your door,
and so made sure that I was really an object of interest to the celebrated Mr.
Sherlock Holmes. Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and started
for the Temple to see my husband. “We both thought the best resource was flight,
when pursued by so formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty
when you call to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace. I
love and am loved by a better man than he. The King may do what he will without
hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged. I keep it only to safeguard
myself, and to preserve a weapon which will always secure me from any steps
which he might take in the future. I leave a photograph which he might care to
possess; and I remain, dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes, “Very truly yours, “IRENE
NORTON, _née_ ADLER.”“What a woman—oh, what a woman!” cried the King of Bohemia,
when we hadall three read this epistle. “Did I not tell you how quick and
resoluteshe was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is it not a
pitythat she was not on my level?”“From what I have seen of the lady, she seems,
indeed, to be on a verydifferent level to your Majesty,” said Holmes coldly. “I
am sorry thatI have not been able to bring your Majesty’s business to a
moresuccessful conclusion.”“On the contrary, my dear sir,” cried the King;
“nothing could be moresuccessful. I know that her word is inviolate. The
photograph is now assafe as if it were in the fire.”“I am glad to hear your
Majesty say so.”“I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can
rewardyou. This ring—” He slipped an emerald snake ring from his finger andheld
it out upon the palm of his hand.“Your Majesty has something which I should
value even more highly,”said Holmes.“You have but to name it.”“This
photograph!”The King stared at him in amazement.“Irene’s photograph!” he cried.
“Certainly, if you wish it.”“I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be
done in the matter.I have the honour to wish you a very good morning.” He bowed,
and,turning away without observing the hand which the King had stretchedout to
him, he set off in my company for his chambers.And that was how a great scandal
threatened to affect the kingdom ofBohemia, and how the best plans of Mr.
Sherlock Holmes were beaten by awoman’s wit. He used to make merry over the
cleverness of women, but Ihave not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks
of Irene Adler, orwhen he refers to her photograph, it is always under the
honourabletitle of _the_ woman.II. THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE I had called upon my
friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumn of last year and found him in
deep conversation with a very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery
red hair. With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes
pulled me abruptly into the room and closed the door behind me.“You could not
possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson,” hesaid cordially.“I was
afraid that you were engaged.”“So I am. Very much so.”“Then I can wait in the
next room.”“Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and
helperin many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he willbe of
the utmost use to me in yours also.”The stout gentleman half rose from his chair
and gave a bob ofgreeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his
smallfat-encircled eyes.“Try the settee,” said Holmes, relapsing into his
armchair and puttinghis fingertips together, as was his custom when in judicial
moods. “Iknow, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is bizarre
andoutside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday life. You haveshown
your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you tochronicle, and, if
you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellishso many of my own little
adventures.”“Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me,”
Iobserved.“You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we
wentinto the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, thatfor
strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to lifeitself, which
is always far more daring than any effort of theimagination.”“A proposition
which I took the liberty of doubting.”“You did, Doctor, but none the less you
must come round to my view, forotherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact
on you until yourreason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right.
Now, Mr.Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning,and
to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singularwhich I have
listened to for some time. You have heard me remark thatthe strangest and most
unique things are very often connected not withthe larger but with the smaller
crimes, and occasionally, indeed, wherethere is room for doubt whether any
positive crime has been committed.As far as I have heard, it is impossible for
me to say whether thepresent case is an instance of crime or not, but the course
of eventsis certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened
to.Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommenceyour
narrative. I ask you not merely because my friend Dr. Watson hasnot heard the
opening part but also because the peculiar nature of thestory makes me anxious
to have every possible detail from your lips. Asa rule, when I have heard some
slight indication of the course ofevents, I am able to guide myself by the
thousands of other similarcases which occur to my memory. In the present
instance I am forced toadmit that the facts are, to the best of my belief,
unique.”The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of somelittle
pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the insidepocket of his
greatcoat. As he glanced down the advertisement column,with his head thrust
forward and the paper flattened out upon his knee,I took a good look at the man
and endeavoured, after the fashion of mycompanion, to read the indications which
might be presented by hisdress or appearance.I did not gain very much, however,
by my inspection. Our visitor boreevery mark of being an average commonplace
British tradesman, obese,pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey shepherd’s
check trousers,a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a
drabwaistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit ofmetal
dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brownovercoat with a
wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him.Altogether, look as I would,
there was nothing remarkable about the mansave his blazing red head, and the
expression of extreme chagrin anddiscontent upon his features.Sherlock Holmes’
quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook his headwith a smile as he noticed
my questioning glances. “Beyond the obviousfacts that he has at some time done
manual labour, that he takes snuff,that he is a Freemason, that he has been in
China, and that he has donea considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce
nothing else.”Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger upon
thepaper, but his eyes upon my companion.“How, in the name of good-fortune, did
you know all that, Mr. Holmes?”he asked. “How did you know, for example, that I
did manual labour.It’s as true as gospel, for I began as a ship’s
carpenter.”“Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger
thanyour left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are
moredeveloped.”“Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?”“I won’t insult your
intelligence by telling you how I read that,especially as, rather against the
strict rules of your order, you usean arc-and-compass breastpin.”“Ah, of course,
I forgot that. But the writing?”“What else can be indicated by that right cuff
so very shiny for fiveinches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the
elbow where yourest it upon the desk?”“Well, but China?”“The fish that you have
tattooed immediately above your right wristcould only have been done in China. I
have made a small study of tattoomarks and have even contributed to the
literature of the subject. Thattrick of staining the fishes’ scales of a
delicate pink is quitepeculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin
hanging fromyour watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple.”Mr. Jabez
Wilson laughed heavily. “Well, I never!” said he. “I thoughtat first that you
had done something clever, but I see that there wasnothing in it after all.”“I
begin to think, Watson,” said Holmes, “that I make a mistake inexplaining.
‘_Omne ignotum pro magnifico_,’ you know, and my poorlittle reputation, such as
it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am socandid. Can you not find the
advertisement, Mr. Wilson?”“Yes, I have got it now,” he answered with his thick
red finger plantedhalfway down the column. “Here it is. This is what began it
all. Youjust read it for yourself, sir.”I took the paper from him and read as
follows:“TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of the lateEzekiah
Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., there is now anothervacancy open
which entitles a member of the League to a salary of £ 4 aweek for purely
nominal services. All red-headed men who are sound inbody and mind and above the
age of twenty-one years, are eligible.Apply in person on Monday, at eleven
o’clock, to Duncan Ross, at theoffices of the League, 7 Pope’s Court, Fleet
Street.”“What on earth does this mean?” I ejaculated after I had twice readover
the extraordinary announcement.Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was
his habit when inhigh spirits. “It is a little off the beaten track, isn’t it?”
said he.“And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all
aboutyourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement hadupon
your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paperand the date.”“It
is _The Morning Chronicle_ of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago.”“Very good.
Now, Mr. Wilson?”“Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes,”said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; “I have a small
pawnbroker’sbusiness at Coburg Square, near the City. It’s not a very large
affair,and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. Iused
to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and Iwould have a
job to pay him but that he is willing to come for halfwages so as to learn the
business.”“What is the name of this obliging youth?” asked Sherlock Holmes.“His
name is Vincent Spaulding, and he’s not such a youth, either. It’shard to say
his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes;and I know very well
that he could better himself and earn twice what Iam able to give him. But,
after all, if he is satisfied, why should Iput ideas in his head?”“Why, indeed?
You seem most fortunate in having an _employé_ who comesunder the full market
price. It is not a common experience amongemployers in this age. I don’t know
that your assistant is not asremarkable as your advertisement.”“Oh, he has his
faults, too,” said Mr. Wilson. “Never was such a fellowfor photography. Snapping
away with a camera when he ought to beimproving his mind, and then diving down
into the cellar like a rabbitinto its hole to develop his pictures. That is his
main fault, but onthe whole he’s a good worker. There’s no vice in him.”“He is
still with you, I presume?”“Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit
of simple cookingand keeps the place clean—that’s all I have in the house, for I
am awidower and never had any family. We live very quietly, sir, the threeof us;
and we keep a roof over our heads and pay our debts, if we donothing more.“The
first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding, hecame down into
the office just this day eight weeks, with this verypaper in his hand, and he
says:“‘I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.’“‘Why that?’
I asks.“‘Why,’ says he, ‘here’s another vacancy on the League of theRed-headed
Men. It’s worth quite a little fortune to any man who getsit, and I understand
that there are more vacancies than there are men,so that the trustees are at
their wits’ end what to do with the money.If my hair would only change colour,
here’s a nice little crib allready for me to step into.’“‘Why, what is it,
then?’ I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a verystay-at-home man, and as my
business came to me instead of my having togo to it, I was often weeks on end
without putting my foot over thedoor-mat. In that way I didn’t know much of what
was going on outside,and I was always glad of a bit of news.“‘Have you never
heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?’ he askedwith his eyes
open.“‘Never.’“‘Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of
thevacancies.’“‘And what are they worth?’ I asked.“‘Oh, merely a couple of
hundred a year, but the work is slight, and itneed not interfere very much with
one’s other occupations.’“Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up
my ears, for thebusiness has not been over good for some years, and an extra
couple ofhundred would have been very handy.“‘Tell me all about it,’ said
I.“‘Well,’ said he, showing me the advertisement, ‘you can see foryourself that
the League has a vacancy, and there is the address whereyou should apply for
particulars. As far as I can make out, the Leaguewas founded by an American
millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was verypeculiar in his ways. He was himself
red-headed, and he had a greatsympathy for all red-headed men; so, when he died,
it was found that hehad left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees,
withinstructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths tomen
whose hair is of that colour. From all I hear it is splendid payand very little
to do.’“‘But,’ said I, ‘there would be millions of red-headed men who
wouldapply.’“‘Not so many as you might think,’ he answered. ‘You see it is
reallyconfined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had started
fromLondon when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a good turn.Then,
again, I have heard it is no use your applying if your hair islight red, or dark
red, or anything but real bright, blazing, fieryred. Now, if you cared to apply,
Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in;but perhaps it would hardly be worth your
while to put yourself out ofthe way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.’“Now,
it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves, that myhair is of a very
full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that ifthere was to be any
competition in the matter I stood as good a chanceas any man that I had ever
met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know somuch about it that I thought he might
prove useful, so I just orderedhim to put up the shutters for the day and to
come right away with me.He was very willing to have a holiday, so we shut the
business up andstarted off for the address that was given us in the
advertisement.“I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes.
Fromnorth, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in hishair had
tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. FleetStreet was choked with
red-headed folk, and Pope’s Court looked like acoster’s orange barrow. I should
not have thought there were so many inthe whole country as were brought together
by that singleadvertisement. Every shade of colour they were—straw, lemon,
orange,brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there werenot
many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw howmany were
waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spauldingwould not hear of it.
How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushedand pulled and butted until he
got me through the crowd, and right upto the steps which led to the office.
There was a double stream uponthe stair, some going up in hope, and some coming
back dejected; but wewedged in as well as we could and soon found ourselves in
the office.”“Your experience has been a most entertaining one,” remarked Holmes
ashis client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch of snuff.“Pray
continue your very interesting statement.”“There was nothing in the office but a
couple of wooden chairs and adeal table, behind which sat a small man with a
head that was evenredder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he
came up,and then he always managed to find some fault in them which
woulddisqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a very
easymatter, after all. However, when our turn came the little man was muchmore
favourable to me than to any of the others, and he closed the dooras we entered,
so that he might have a private word with us.“‘This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,’ said
my assistant, ‘and he is willing tofill a vacancy in the League.’“‘And he is
admirably suited for it,’ the other answered. ‘He has everyrequirement. I cannot
recall when I have seen anything so fine.’ Hetook a step backward, cocked his
head on one side, and gazed at my hairuntil I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly
he plunged forward, wrung myhand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.“‘It
would be injustice to hesitate,’ said he. ‘You will, however, I amsure, excuse
me for taking an obvious precaution.’ With that he seizedmy hair in both his
hands, and tugged until I yelled with the pain.‘There is water in your eyes,’
said he as he released me. ‘I perceivethat all is as it should be. But we have
to be careful, for we havetwice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could
tell you talesof cobbler’s wax which would disgust you with human nature.’ He
steppedover to the window and shouted through it at the top of his voice thatthe
vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below,and the folk
all trooped away in different directions until there wasnot a red-head to be
seen except my own and that of the manager.“‘My name,’ said he, ‘is Mr. Duncan
Ross, and I am myself one of thepensioners upon the fund left by our noble
benefactor. Are you amarried man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?’“I answered
that I had not.“His face fell immediately.“‘Dear me!’ he said gravely, ‘that is
very serious indeed! I am sorryto hear you say that. The fund was, of course,
for the propagation andspread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance.
It isexceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.’“My face lengthened
at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was notto have the vacancy after all;
but after thinking it over for a fewminutes he said that it would be all
right.“‘In the case of another,’ said he, ‘the objection might be fatal, butwe
must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a head of hair asyours. When
shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?’“‘Well, it is a little awkward,
for I have a business already,’ said I.“‘Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!’
said Vincent Spaulding. ‘Ishould be able to look after that for you.’“‘What
would be the hours?’ I asked.“‘Ten to two.’“Now a pawnbroker’s business is
mostly done of an evening, Mr. Holmes,especially Thursday and Friday evening,
which is just before pay-day;so it would suit me very well to earn a little in
the mornings.Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and that he would
seeto anything that turned up.“‘That would suit me very well,’ said I. ‘And the
pay?’“‘Is £ 4 a week.’“‘And the work?’“‘Is purely nominal.’“‘What do you call
purely nominal?’“‘Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the
building, thewhole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever.
Thewill is very clear upon that point. You don’t comply with theconditions if
you budge from the office during that time.’“‘It’s only four hours a day, and I
should not think of leaving,’ saidI.“‘No excuse will avail,’ said Mr. Duncan
Ross; ‘neither sickness norbusiness nor anything else. There you must stay, or
you lose yourbillet.’“‘And the work?’“‘Is to copy out the _Encyclopædia
Britannica_. There is the firstvolume of it in that press. You must find your
own ink, pens, andblotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you
be readyto-morrow?’“‘Certainly,’ I answered.“‘Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson,
and let me congratulate you oncemore on the important position which you have
been fortunate enough togain.’ He bowed me out of the room and I went home with
my assistant,hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own
goodfortune.“Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in
lowspirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affairmust be
some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be Icould not imagine. It
seemed altogether past belief that anyone couldmake such a will, or that they
would pay such a sum for doing anythingso simple as copying out the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_. VincentSpaulding did what he could to cheer me up,
but by bedtime I hadreasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the
morning Idetermined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle
ofink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, Istarted off
for Pope’s Court.“Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as
possible.The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was there tosee
that I got fairly to work. He started me off upon the letter A, andthen he left
me; but he would drop in from time to time to see that allwas right with me. At
two o’clock he bade me good-day, complimented meupon the amount that I had
written, and locked the door of the officeafter me.“This went on day after day,
Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the managercame in and planked down four golden
sovereigns for my week’s work. Itwas the same next week, and the same the week
after. Every morning Iwas there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two. By
degrees Mr.Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a morning, and then, after
atime, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared toleave the
room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come,and the billet was
such a good one, and suited me so well, that I wouldnot risk the loss of
it.“Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots andArchery
and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped withdiligence that I might get
on to the B’s before very long. It cost mesomething in foolscap, and I had
pretty nearly filled a shelf with mywritings. And then suddenly the whole
business came to an end.”“To an end?”“Yes, sir. And no later than this morning.
I went to my work as usualat ten o’clock, but the door was shut and locked, with
a little squareof cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack.
Hereit is, and you can read for yourself.”He held up a piece of white cardboard
about the size of a sheet ofnote-paper. It read in this fashion:“THE RED-HEADED
LEAGUE IS DISSOLVED. October 9, 1890.”Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt
announcement and the ruefulface behind it, until the comical side of the affair
so completelyovertopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a
roarof laughter.“I cannot see that there is anything very funny,” cried our
client,flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. “If you can do
nothingbetter than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere.”“No, no,” cried Holmes,
shoving him back into the chair from which hehad half risen. “I really wouldn’t
miss your case for the world. It ismost refreshingly unusual. But there is, if
you will excuse my sayingso, something just a little funny about it. Pray what
steps did youtake when you found the card upon the door?”“I was staggered, sir.
I did not know what to do. Then I called at theoffices round, but none of them
seemed to know anything about it.Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an
accountant living on theground floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what
had become ofthe Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any
suchbody. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that thename was
new to him.“‘Well,’ said I, ‘the gentleman at No. 4.’“‘What, the red-headed
man?’“‘Yes.’“‘Oh,’ said he, ‘his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor
andwas using my room as a temporary convenience until his new premiseswere
ready. He moved out yesterday.’“‘Where could I find him?’“‘Oh, at his new
offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17 KingEdward Street, near St.
Paul’s.’“I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was
amanufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard ofeither
Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross.”“And what did you do then?” asked
Holmes.“I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of myassistant.
But he could not help me in any way. He could only say thatif I waited I should
hear by post. But that was not quite good enough,Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to
lose such a place without a struggle, so,as I had heard that you were good
enough to give advice to poor folkwho were in need of it, I came right away to
you.”“And you did very wisely,” said Holmes. “Your case is an
exceedinglyremarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what
youhave told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang fromit than
might at first sight appear.”“Grave enough!” said Mr. Jabez Wilson. “Why, I have
lost four pound aweek.”“As far as you are personally concerned,” remarked
Holmes, “I do notsee that you have any grievance against this extraordinary
league. Onthe contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some £ 30, to
saynothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subjectwhich
comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing by them.”“No, sir. But I want to
find out about them, and who they are, and whattheir object was in playing this
prank—if it was a prank—upon me. Itwas a pretty expensive joke for them, for it
cost them two and thirtypounds.”“We shall endeavour to clear up these points for
you. And, first, oneor two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who
first calledyour attention to the advertisement—how long had he been with
you?”“About a month then.”“How did he come?”“In answer to an advertisement.”“Was
he the only applicant?”“No, I had a dozen.”“Why did you pick him?”“Because he
was handy and would come cheap.”“At half wages, in fact.”“Yes.”“What is he like,
this Vincent Spaulding?”“Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on
his face,though he’s not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon
hisforehead.”Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. “I thought
asmuch,” said he. “Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced
forearrings?”“Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was
alad.”“Hum!” said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. “He is still
withyou?”“Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him.”“And has your business been
attended to in your absence?”“Nothing to complain of, sir. There’s never very
much to do of amorning.”“That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you
an opinion uponthe subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday,
and Ihope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion.”“Well, Watson,” said
Holmes when our visitor had left us, “what do youmake of it all?”“I make nothing
of it,” I answered frankly. “It is a most mysteriousbusiness.”“As a rule,” said
Holmes, “the more bizarre a thing is the lessmysterious it proves to be. It is
your commonplace, featureless crimeswhich are really puzzling, just as a
commonplace face is the mostdifficult to identify. But I must be prompt over
this matter.”“What are you going to do, then?” I asked.“To smoke,” he answered.
“It is quite a three pipe problem, and I begthat you won’t speak to me for fifty
minutes.” He curled himself up inhis chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his
hawk-like nose, andthere he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe
thrusting outlike the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the conclusion
thathe had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenlysprang
out of his chair with the gesture of a man who has made up hismind and put his
pipe down upon the mantelpiece.“Sarasate plays at the St. James’s Hall this
afternoon,” he remarked.“What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare
you for a fewhours?”“I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very
absorbing.”“Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first,
andwe can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good dealof
German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste thanItalian or
French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Comealong!”We travelled
by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short walktook us to Saxe-Coburg
Square, the scene of the singular story which wehad listened to in the morning.
It was a poky, little, shabby-genteelplace, where four lines of dingy
two-storied brick houses looked outinto a small railed-in enclosure, where a
lawn of weedy grass and a fewclumps of faded laurel bushes made a hard fight
against a smoke-ladenand uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brown
board with“JABEZ WILSON” in white letters, upon a corner house, announced
theplace where our red-headed client carried on his business. SherlockHolmes
stopped in front of it with his head on one side and looked itall over, with his
eyes shining brightly between puckered lids. Then hewalked slowly up the street,
and then down again to the corner, stilllooking keenly at the houses. Finally he
returned to the pawnbroker’s,and, having thumped vigorously upon the pavement
with his stick two orthree times, he went up to the door and knocked. It was
instantlyopened by a bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him
tostep in.“Thank you,” said Holmes, “I only wished to ask you how you would
gofrom here to the Strand.”“Third right, fourth left,” answered the assistant
promptly, closingthe door.“Smart fellow, that,” observed Holmes as we walked
away. “He is, in myjudgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I
am notsure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something of
himbefore.”“Evidently,” said I, “Mr. Wilson’s assistant counts for a good deal
inthis mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquired yourway
merely in order that you might see him.”“Not him.”“What then?”“The knees of his
trousers.”“And what did you see?”“What I expected to see.”“Why did you beat the
pavement?”“My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We
arespies in an enemy’s country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.Let us
now explore the parts which lie behind it.”The road in which we found ourselves
as we turned round the corner fromthe retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as
great a contrast to it asthe front of a picture does to the back. It was one of
the mainarteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to the north and
west.The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowing ina
double tide inward and outward, while the footpaths were black withthe hurrying
swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult to realise as welooked at the line of
fine shops and stately business premises thatthey really abutted on the other
side upon the faded and stagnantsquare which we had just quitted.“Let me see,”
said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing alongthe line, “I should like
just to remember the order of the houses here.It is a hobby of mine to have an
exact knowledge of London. There isMortimer’s, the tobacconist, the little
newspaper shop, the Coburgbranch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian
Restaurant, andMcFarlane’s carriage-building depot. That carries us right on to
theother block. And now, Doctor, we’ve done our work, so it’s time we hadsome
play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land,where all is
sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are nored-headed clients to vex us
with their conundrums.”My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not
only a verycapable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All
theafternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness,gently
waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while hisgently smiling face
and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike thoseof Holmes the sleuth-hound,
Holmes the relentless, keen-witted,ready-handed criminal agent, as it was
possible to conceive. In hissingular character the dual nature alternately
asserted itself, and hisextreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have
often thought,the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood
whichoccasionally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him
fromextreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was neverso
truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been lounging inhis armchair
amid his improvisations and his black-letter editions.Then it was that the lust
of the chase would suddenly come upon him,and that his brilliant reasoning power
would rise to the level ofintuition, until those who were unacquainted with his
methods wouldlook askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that of
othermortals. When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at
St.James’s Hall I felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whomhe had
set himself to hunt down.“You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor,” he remarked as
we emerged.“Yes, it would be as well.”“And I have some business to do which will
take some hours. Thisbusiness at Coburg Square is serious.”“Why serious?”“A
considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason tobelieve that we
shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Saturdayrather complicates
matters. I shall want your help to-night.”“At what time?”“Ten will be early
enough.”“I shall be at Baker Street at ten.”“Very well. And, I say, Doctor,
there may be some little danger, sokindly put your army revolver in your
pocket.” He waved his hand,turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant
among the crowd.I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was
alwaysoppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with
SherlockHolmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen what he hadseen,
and yet from his words it was evident that he saw clearly notonly what had
happened but what was about to happen, while to me thewhole business was still
confused and grotesque. As I drove home to myhouse in Kensington I thought over
it all, from the extraordinary storyof the red-headed copier of the
_Encyclopædia_ down to the visit toSaxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words
with which he had parted fromme. What was this nocturnal expedition, and why
should I go armed?Where were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint
from Holmesthat this smooth-faced pawnbroker’s assistant was a formidable
man—aman who might play a deep game. I tried to puzzle it out, but gave itup in
despair and set the matter aside until night should bring anexplanation.It was a
quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my wayacross the Park, and
so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Twohansoms were standing at the door,
and as I entered the passage I heardthe sound of voices from above. On entering
his room, I found Holmes inanimated conversation with two men, one of whom I
recognised as PeterJones, the official police agent, while the other was a long,
thin,sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and oppressively
respectablefrock-coat.“Ha! Our party is complete,” said Holmes, buttoning up his
pea-jacketand taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack. “Watson, I think
youknow Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr.Merryweather,
who is to be our companion in to-night’s adventure.”“We’re hunting in couples
again, Doctor, you see,” said Jones in hisconsequential way. “Our friend here is
a wonderful man for starting achase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to
do the running down.”“I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our
chase,”observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.“You may place considerable confidence
in Mr. Holmes, sir,” said thepolice agent loftily. “He has his own little
methods, which are, if hewon’t mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical
and fantastic,but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much
to saythat once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and theAgra
treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the officialforce.”“Oh, if you
say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right,” said the stranger withdeference. “Still, I
confess that I miss my rubber. It is the firstSaturday night for
seven-and-twenty years that I have not had myrubber.”“I think you will find,”
said Sherlock Holmes, “that you will play fora higher stake to-night than you
have ever done yet, and that the playwill be more exciting. For you, Mr.
Merryweather, the stake will besome £ 30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the
man upon whom youwish to lay your hands.”“John Clay, the murderer, thief,
smasher, and forger. He’s a young man,Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of
his profession, and I wouldrather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal
in London. He’s aremarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal
duke,and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning ashis
fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we neverknow where to
find the man himself. He’ll crack a crib in Scotland oneweek, and be raising
money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next.I’ve been on his track for
years and have never set eyes on him yet.”“I hope that I may have the pleasure
of introducing you to-night. I’vehad one or two little turns also with Mr. John
Clay, and I agree withyou that he is at the head of his profession. It is past
ten, however,and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first
hansom,Watson and I will follow in the second.”Sherlock Holmes was not very
communicative during the long drive andlay back in the cab humming the tunes
which he had heard in theafternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of
gas-lit streetsuntil we emerged into Farrington Street.“We are close there now,”
my friend remarked. “This fellow Merryweatheris a bank director, and personally
interested in the matter. I thoughtit as well to have Jones with us also. He is
not a bad fellow, thoughan absolute imbecile in his profession. He has one
positive virtue. Heis as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobster if he
gets hisclaws upon anyone. Here we are, and they are waiting for us.”We had
reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had foundourselves in the
morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following theguidance of Mr.
Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passage andthrough a side door, which he
opened for us. Within there was a smallcorridor, which ended in a very massive
iron gate. This also wasopened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps,
which terminatedat another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to light
alantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage, andso,
after opening a third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which waspiled all
round with crates and massive boxes.“You are not very vulnerable from above,”
Holmes remarked as he held upthe lantern and gazed about him.“Nor from below,”
said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon theflags which lined the floor.
“Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!” heremarked, looking up in surprise.“I
must really ask you to be a little more quiet!” said Holmesseverely. “You have
already imperilled the whole success of ourexpedition. Might I beg that you
would have the goodness to sit downupon one of those boxes, and not to
interfere?”The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a
veryinjured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his knees uponthe
floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began to examineminutely the
cracks between the stones. A few seconds sufficed tosatisfy him, for he sprang
to his feet again and put his glass in hispocket.“We have at least an hour
before us,” he remarked, “for they can hardlytake any steps until the good
pawnbroker is safely in bed. Then theywill not lose a minute, for the sooner
they do their work the longertime they will have for their escape. We are at
present, Doctor—as nodoubt you have divined—in the cellar of the City branch of
one of theprincipal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of
directors,and he will explain to you that there are reasons why the more
daringcriminals of London should take a considerable interest in this cellarat
present.”“It is our French gold,” whispered the director. “We have had
severalwarnings that an attempt might be made upon it.”“Your French gold?”“Yes.
We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources andborrowed for that
purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France. Ithas become known that we
have never had occasion to unpack the money,and that it is still lying in our
cellar. The crate upon which I sitcontains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers
of lead foil. Ourreserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually
kept in asingle branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon
thesubject.”“Which were very well justified,” observed Holmes. “And now it is
timethat we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hour matterswill
come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Merryweather, we must put thescreen over
that dark lantern.”“And sit in the dark?”“I am afraid so. I had brought a pack
of cards in my pocket, and Ithought that, as we were a _partie carrée_, you
might have your rubberafter all. But I see that the enemy’s preparations have
gone so farthat we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we
mustchoose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall takethem at
a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are careful.I shall stand
behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves behindthose. Then, when I flash
a light upon them, close in swiftly. If theyfire, Watson, have no compunction
about shooting them down.”I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the
wooden case behindwhich I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of
his lanternand left us in pitch darkness—such an absolute darkness as I have
neverbefore experienced. The smell of hot metal remained to assure us thatthe
light was still there, ready to flash out at a moment’s notice. Tome, with my
nerves worked up to a pitch of expectancy, there wassomething depressing and
subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the colddank air of the vault.“They have
but one retreat,” whispered Holmes. “That is back throughthe house into
Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what Iasked you, Jones?”“I have an
inspector and two officers waiting at the front door.”“Then we have stopped all
the holes. And now we must be silent andwait.”What a time it seemed! From
comparing notes afterwards it was but anhour and a quarter, yet it appeared to
me that the night must havealmost gone, and the dawn be breaking above us. My
limbs were weary andstiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my nerves
were worked upto the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was so acute that
Icould not only hear the gentle breathing of my companions, but I
coulddistinguish the deeper, heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from thethin,
sighing note of the bank director. From my position I could lookover the case in
the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caughtthe glint of a light.At first
it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then itlengthened out until it
became a yellow line, and then, without anywarning or sound, a gash seemed to
open and a hand appeared, a white,almost womanly hand, which felt about in the
centre of the little areaof light. For a minute or more the hand, with its
writhing fingers,protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly
as itappeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark whichmarked a
chink between the stones.Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a
rending, tearingsound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon its side
andleft a square, gaping hole, through which streamed the light of alantern.
Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face, whichlooked keenly about
it, and then, with a hand on either side of theaperture, drew itself
shoulder-high and waist-high, until one kneerested upon the edge. In another
instant he stood at the side of thehole and was hauling after him a companion,
lithe and small likehimself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.“It’s
all clear,” he whispered. “Have you the chisel and the bags?Great Scott! Jump,
Archie, jump, and I’ll swing for it!”Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized
the intruder by the collar.The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound
of rending clothas Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed upon the
barrel of arevolver, but Holmes’ hunting crop came down on the man’s wrist,
andthe pistol clinked upon the stone floor.“It’s no use, John Clay,” said Holmes
blandly. “You have no chance atall.”“So I see,” the other answered with the
utmost coolness. “I fancy thatmy pal is all right, though I see you have got his
coat-tails.”“There are three men waiting for him at the door,” said Holmes.“Oh,
indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I mustcompliment
you.”“And I you,” Holmes answered. “Your red-headed idea was very new
andeffective.”“You’ll see your pal again presently,” said Jones. “He’s quicker
atclimbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derbies.”“I beg
that you will not touch me with your filthy hands,” remarked ourprisoner as the
handcuffs clattered upon his wrists. “You may not beaware that I have royal
blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also,when you address me always to say
‘sir’ and ‘please.’”“All right,” said Jones with a stare and a snigger. “Well,
would youplease, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry
yourHighness to the police-station?”“That is better,” said John Clay serenely.
He made a sweeping bow tothe three of us and walked quietly off in the custody
of the detective.“Really, Mr. Holmes,” said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them
fromthe cellar, “I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you.There is
no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the mostcomplete manner one of
the most determined attempts at bank robberythat have ever come within my
experience.”“I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr.
JohnClay,” said Holmes. “I have been at some small expense over thismatter,
which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I amamply repaid by
having had an experience which is in many ways unique,and by hearing the very
remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League.”“You see, Watson,” he explained
in the early hours of the morning as wesat over a glass of whisky and soda in
Baker Street, “it was perfectlyobvious from the first that the only possible
object of this ratherfantastic business of the advertisement of the League, and
the copyingof the _Encyclopædia_, must be to get this not over-bright
pawnbrokerout of the way for a number of hours every day. It was a curious way
ofmanaging it, but, really, it would be difficult to suggest a better.The method
was no doubt suggested to Clay’s ingenious mind by thecolour of his accomplice’s
hair. The £ 4 a week was a lure which mustdraw him, and what was it to them, who
were playing for thousands? Theyput in the advertisement, one rogue has the
temporary office, the otherrogue incites the man to apply for it, and together
they manage tosecure his absence every morning in the week. From the time that
Iheard of the assistant having come for half wages, it was obvious to methat he
had some strong motive for securing the situation.”“But how could you guess what
the motive was?”“Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a
merevulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man’sbusiness
was a small one, and there was nothing in his house whichcould account for such
elaborate preparations, and such an expenditureas they were at. It must, then,
be something out of the house. Whatcould it be? I thought of the assistant’s
fondness for photography, andhis trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar!
There was the endof this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this
mysteriousassistant and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and
mostdaring criminals in London. He was doing something in thecellar—something
which took many hours a day for months on end. Whatcould it be, once more? I
could think of nothing save that he wasrunning a tunnel to some other
building.“So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. Isurprised
you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I wasascertaining whether the
cellar stretched out in front or behind. Itwas not in front. Then I rang the
bell, and, as I hoped, the assistantanswered it. We have had some skirmishes,
but we had never set eyesupon each other before. I hardly looked at his face.
His knees werewhat I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how
worn,wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours ofburrowing. The
only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. Iwalked round the corner,
saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on ourfriend’s premises, and felt that I
had solved my problem. When youdrove home after the concert I called upon
Scotland Yard and upon thechairman of the bank directors, with the result that
you have seen.”“And how could you tell that they would make their attempt
to-night?” Iasked.“Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign
that theycared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson’s presence—in other words,
thatthey had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that they shoulduse it
soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might beremoved. Saturday would
suit them better than any other day, as itwould give them two days for their
escape. For all these reasons Iexpected them to come to-night.”“You reasoned it
out beautifully,” I exclaimed in unfeigned admiration.“It is so long a chain,
and yet every link rings true.”“It saved me from ennui,” he answered, yawning.
“Alas! I already feelit closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort
to escapefrom the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me to
doso.”“And you are a benefactor of the race,” said I.He shrugged his shoulders.
“Well, perhaps, after all, it is of somelittle use,” he remarked. “‘_L’homme
c’est rien—l’œuvre c’est tout_,’as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand.”III. A
CASE OF IDENTITY“My dear fellow,” said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side
of thefire in his lodgings at Baker Street, “life is infinitely stranger
thananything which the mind of man could invent. We would not dare toconceive
the things which are really mere commonplaces of existence. Ifwe could fly out
of that window hand in hand, hover over this greatcity, gently remove the roofs,
and peep in at the queer things whichare going on, the strange coincidences, the
plannings, thecross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events, working
throughgenerations, and leading to the most _outré_ results, it would make
allfiction with its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most staleand
unprofitable.”“And yet I am not convinced of it,” I answered. “The cases which
cometo light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough.We
have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits, andyet the
result is, it must be confessed, neither fascinating norartistic.”“A certain
selection and discretion must be used in producing arealistic effect,” remarked
Holmes. “This is wanting in the policereport, where more stress is laid,
perhaps, upon the platitudes of themagistrate than upon the details, which to an
observer contain thevital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there is
nothing sounnatural as the commonplace.”I smiled and shook my head. “I can quite
understand your thinking so,”I said. “Of course, in your position of unofficial
adviser and helperto everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three
continents,you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre.
Buthere”—I picked up the morning paper from the ground—“let us put it to
apractical test. Here is the first heading upon which I come. ‘Ahusband’s
cruelty to his wife.’ There is half a column of print, but Iknow without reading
it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. Thereis, of course, the other woman,
the drink, the push, the blow, thebruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady.
The crudest of writerscould invent nothing more crude.”“Indeed, your example is
an unfortunate one for your argument,” saidHolmes, taking the paper and glancing
his eye down it. “This is theDundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was
engaged in clearingup some small points in connection with it. The husband was
ateetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained of wasthat he
had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by takingout his false teeth
and hurling them at his wife, which, you willallow, is not an action likely to
occur to the imagination of theaverage story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff,
Doctor, and acknowledgethat I have scored over you in your example.”He held out
his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in thecentre of the lid. Its
splendour was in such contrast to his homelyways and simple life that I could
not help commenting upon it.“Ah,” said he, “I forgot that I had not seen you for
some weeks. It isa little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my
assistancein the case of the Irene Adler papers.”“And the ring?” I asked,
glancing at a remarkable brilliant whichsparkled upon his finger.“It was from
the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in whichI served them was of
such delicacy that I cannot confide it even toyou, who have been good enough to
chronicle one or two of my littleproblems.”“And have you any on hand just now?”
I asked with interest.“Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of
interest.They are important, you understand, without being interesting. Indeed,I
have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that there is afield for
the observation, and for the quick analysis of cause andeffect which gives the
charm to an investigation. The larger crimes areapt to be the simpler, for the
bigger the crime the more obvious, as arule, is the motive. In these cases, save
for one rather intricatematter which has been referred to me from Marseilles,
there is nothingwhich presents any features of interest. It is possible,
however, thatI may have something better before very many minutes are over, for
thisis one of my clients, or I am much mistaken.”He had risen from his chair and
was standing between the parted blindsgazing down into the dull neutral-tinted
London street. Looking overhis shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite
there stood a largewoman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a large
curling redfeather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a coquettish
Duchessof Devonshire fashion over her ear. From under this great panoply
shepeeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at our windows, while herbody
oscillated backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with herglove buttons.
Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leavesthe bank, she hurried
across the road, and we heard the sharp clang ofthe bell.“I have seen those
symptoms before,” said Holmes, throwing hiscigarette into the fire. “Oscillation
upon the pavement always means an_affaire de cœur_. She would like advice, but
is not sure that thematter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even
here we maydiscriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she
nolonger oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire. Here wemay
take it that there is a love matter, but that the maiden is not somuch angry as
perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person toresolve our doubts.”As he
spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons enteredto announce
Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed behindhis small black figure
like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tinypilot boat. Sherlock Holmes
welcomed her with the easy courtesy forwhich he was remarkable, and, having
closed the door and bowed her intoan armchair, he looked her over in the minute
and yet abstractedfashion which was peculiar to him.“Do you not find,” he said,
“that with your short sight it is a littletrying to do so much typewriting?”“I
did at first,” she answered, “but now I know where the letters arewithout
looking.” Then, suddenly realising the full purport of hiswords, she gave a
violent start and looked up, with fear andastonishment upon her broad,
good-humoured face. “You’ve heard aboutme, Mr. Holmes,” she cried, “else how
could you know all that?”“Never mind,” said Holmes, laughing; “it is my business
to know things.Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook. If
not, whyshould you come to consult me?”“I came to you, sir, because I heard of
you from Mrs. Etherege, whosehusband you found so easy when the police and
everyone had given him upfor dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much
for me. I’m notrich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besides
thelittle that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to know whathas
become of Mr. Hosmer Angel.”“Why did you come away to consult me in such a
hurry?” asked SherlockHolmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to the
ceiling.Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of Miss
MarySutherland. “Yes, I did bang out of the house,” she said, “for it mademe
angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank—that is, myfather—took it all.
He would not go to the police, and he would not goto you, and so at last, as he
would do nothing and kept on saying thatthere was no harm done, it made me mad,
and I just on with my thingsand came right away to you.”“Your father,” said
Holmes, “your stepfather, surely, since the name isdifferent.”“Yes, my
stepfather. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too,for he is only five
years and two months older than myself.”“And your mother is alive?”“Oh, yes,
mother is alive and well. I wasn’t best pleased, Mr. Holmes,when she married
again so soon after father’s death, and a man who wasnearly fifteen years
younger than herself. Father was a plumber in theTottenham Court Road, and he
left a tidy business behind him, whichmother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the
foreman; but when Mr. Windibankcame he made her sell the business, for he was
very superior, being atraveller in wines. They got £ 4700 for the goodwill and
interest,which wasn’t near as much as father could have got if he had
beenalive.”I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this rambling
andinconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he had listened withthe
greatest concentration of attention.“Your own little income,” he asked, “does it
come out of the business?”“Oh, no, sir. It is quite separate and was left me by
my uncle Ned inAuckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4½ per cent. Two
thousandfive hundred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch the
interest.”“You interest me extremely,” said Holmes. “And since you draw so
largea sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain, you nodoubt
travel a little and indulge yourself in every way. I believe thata single lady
can get on very nicely upon an income of about £ 60.”“I could do with much less
than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understandthat as long as I live at home I don’t
wish to be a burden to them, andso they have the use of the money just while I
am staying with them. Ofcourse, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank
draws my interestevery quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can
dopretty well with what I earn at typewriting. It brings me twopence asheet, and
I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day.”“You have made your
position very clear to me,” said Holmes. “This ismy friend, Dr. Watson, before
whom you can speak as freely as beforemyself. Kindly tell us now all about your
connection with Mr. HosmerAngel.”A flush stole over Miss Sutherland’s face, and
she picked nervously atthe fringe of her jacket. “I met him first at the
gasfitters’ ball,”she said. “They used to send father tickets when he was alive,
and thenafterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother. Mr. Windibankdid
not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere. He wouldget quite mad if
I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat. Butthis time I was set on
going, and I would go; for what right had he toprevent? He said the folk were
not fit for us to know, when allfather’s friends were to be there. And he said
that I had nothing fitto wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so
much as takenout of the drawer. At last, when nothing else would do, he went off
toFrance upon the business of the firm, but we went, mother and I, withMr.
Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was there I met Mr.Hosmer Angel.”“I
suppose,” said Holmes, “that when Mr. Windibank came back fromFrance he was very
annoyed at your having gone to the ball.”“Oh, well, he was very good about it.
He laughed, I remember, andshrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use
denying anything to awoman, for she would have her way.”“I see. Then at the
gasfitters’ ball you met, as I understand, agentleman called Mr. Hosmer
Angel.”“Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if wehad
got home all safe, and after that we met him—that is to say, Mr.Holmes, I met
him twice for walks, but after that father came backagain, and Mr. Hosmer Angel
could not come to the house any more.”“No?”“Well, you know father didn’t like
anything of the sort. He wouldn’thave any visitors if he could help it, and he
used to say that a womanshould be happy in her own family circle. But then, as I
used to say tomother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and I had not
gotmine yet.”“But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt to see
you?”“Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmer wroteand
said that it would be safer and better not to see each other untilhe had gone.
We could write in the meantime, and he used to write everyday. I took the
letters in in the morning, so there was no need forfather to know.”“Were you
engaged to the gentleman at this time?”“Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged
after the first walk that wetook. Hosmer—Mr. Angel—was a cashier in an office in
LeadenhallStreet—and—”“What office?”“That’s the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don’t
know.”“Where did he live, then?”“He slept on the premises.”“And you don’t know
his address?”“No—except that it was Leadenhall Street.”“Where did you address
your letters, then?”“To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till
called for. Hesaid that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by
allthe other clerks about having letters from a lady, so I offered totypewrite
them, like he did his, but he wouldn’t have that, for he saidthat when I wrote
them they seemed to come from me, but when they weretypewritten he always felt
that the machine had come between us. Thatwill just show you how fond he was of
me, Mr. Holmes, and the littlethings that he would think of.”“It was most
suggestive,” said Holmes. “It has long been an axiom ofmine that the little
things are infinitely the most important. Can youremember any other little
things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?”“He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would
rather walk with me in theevening than in the daylight, for he said that he
hated to beconspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice
wasgentle. He’d had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, hetold me,
and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating,whispering fashion of
speech. He was always well dressed, very neat andplain, but his eyes were weak,
just as mine are, and he wore tintedglasses against the glare.”“Well, and what
happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather, returnedto France?”“Mr. Hosmer
Angel came to the house again and proposed that we shouldmarry before father
came back. He was in dreadful earnest and made meswear, with my hands on the
Testament, that whatever happened I wouldalways be true to him. Mother said he
was quite right to make me swear,and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother
was all in his favourfrom the first and was even fonder of him than I was. Then,
when theytalked of marrying within the week, I began to ask about father;
butthey both said never to mind about father, but just to tell himafterwards,
and mother said she would make it all right with him. Ididn’t quite like that,
Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should askhis leave, as he was only a few
years older than me; but I didn’t wantto do anything on the sly, so I wrote to
father at Bordeaux, where thecompany has its French offices, but the letter came
back to me on thevery morning of the wedding.”“It missed him, then?”“Yes, sir;
for he had started to England just before it arrived.”“Ha! that was unfortunate.
Your wedding was arranged, then, for theFriday. Was it to be in church?”“Yes,
sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour’s, near King’sCross, and we
were to have breakfast afterwards at the St. PancrasHotel. Hosmer came for us in
a hansom, but as there were two of us heput us both into it and stepped himself
into a four-wheeler, whichhappened to be the only other cab in the street. We
got to the churchfirst, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to
stepout, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box andlooked
there was no one there! The cabman said that he could notimagine what had become
of him, for he had seen him get in with his owneyes. That was last Friday, Mr.
Holmes, and I have never seen or heardanything since then to throw any light
upon what became of him.”“It seems to me that you have been very shamefully
treated,” saidHolmes.“Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why,
all themorning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was to be true;and
that even if something quite unforeseen occurred to separate us, Iwas always to
remember that I was pledged to him, and that he wouldclaim his pledge sooner or
later. It seemed strange talk for awedding-morning, but what has happened since
gives a meaning to it.”“Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that
someunforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?”“Yes, sir. I believe that he
foresaw some danger, or else he would nothave talked so. And then I think that
what he foresaw happened.”“But you have no notion as to what it could have
been?”“None.”“One more question. How did your mother take the matter?”“She was
angry, and said that I was never to speak of the matteragain.”“And your father?
Did you tell him?”“Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had
happened, andthat I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interest
couldanyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leavingme?
Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me and gotmy money
settled on him, there might be some reason, but Hosmer wasvery independent about
money and never would look at a shilling ofmine. And yet, what could have
happened? And why could he not write?Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it,
and I can’t sleep a wink atnight.” She pulled a little handkerchief out of her
muff and began tosob heavily into it.“I shall glance into the case for you,”
said Holmes, rising, “and Ihave no doubt that we shall reach some definite
result. Let the weightof the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind
dwell upon itfurther. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish from
yourmemory, as he has done from your life.”“Then you don’t think I’ll see him
again?”“I fear not.”“Then what has happened to him?”“You will leave that
question in my hands. I should like an accuratedescription of him and any
letters of his which you can spare.”“I advertised for him in last Saturday’s
_Chronicle_,” said she. “Hereis the slip and here are four letters from
him.”“Thank you. And your address?”“No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell.”“Mr. Angel’s
address you never had, I understand. Where is yourfather’s place of
business?”“He travels for Westhouse & Marbank, the great claret importers
ofFenchurch Street.”“Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You
will leavethe papers here, and remember the advice which I have given you.
Letthe whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect
yourlife.”“You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be
trueto Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back.”For all the
preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was somethingnoble in the simple
faith of our visitor which compelled our respect.She laid her little bundle of
papers upon the table and went her way,with a promise to come again whenever she
might be summoned.Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his
fingertips stillpressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, and
his gazedirected upward to the ceiling. Then he took down from the rack the
oldand oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor, and, having litit, he
leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue cloud-wreathsspinning up from him,
and a look of infinite languor in his face.“Quite an interesting study, that
maiden,” he observed. “I found hermore interesting than her little problem,
which, by the way, is rathera trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you
consult my index, inAndover in ’77, and there was something of the sort at The
Hague lastyear. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two details
whichwere new to me. But the maiden herself was most instructive.”“You appeared
to read a good deal upon her which was quite invisible tome,” I remarked.“Not
invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look,and so you
missed all that was important. I can never bring you torealise the importance of
sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails,or the great issues that may hang
from a boot-lace. Now, what did yougather from that woman’s appearance? Describe
it.”“Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with afeather of a
brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewnupon it, and a fringe
of little black jet ornaments. Her dress wasbrown, rather darker than coffee
colour, with a little purple plush atthe neck and sleeves. Her gloves were
greyish and were worn through atthe right forefinger. Her boots I didn’t
observe. She had small round,hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being
fairly well-to-do ina vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way.”Sherlock Holmes
clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.“’Pon my word, Watson, you are
coming along wonderfully. You havereally done very well indeed. It is true that
you have missedeverything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and
youhave a quick eye for colour. Never trust to general impressions, myboy, but
concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is alwaysat a woman’s sleeve.
In a man it is perhaps better first to take theknee of the trouser. As you
observe, this woman had plush upon hersleeves, which is a most useful material
for showing traces. The doubleline a little above the wrist, where the
typewritist presses againstthe table, was beautifully defined. The
sewing-machine, of the handtype, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left
arm, and on the sideof it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right across
thebroadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and, observingthe
dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ventured a remarkupon short
sight and typewriting, which seemed to surprise her.”“It surprised me.”“But,
surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised and interestedon glancing down
to observe that, though the boots which she waswearing were not unlike each
other, they were really odd ones; the onehaving a slightly decorated toe-cap,
and the other a plain one. One wasbuttoned only in the two lower buttons out of
five, and the other atthe first, third, and fifth. Now, when you see that a
young lady,otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd
boots,half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away in
ahurry.”“And what else?” I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, by
myfriend’s incisive reasoning.“I noted, in passing, that she had written a note
before leaving homebut after being fully dressed. You observed that her right
glove wastorn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both
gloveand finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in a hurry
anddipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, or the markwould not
remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing, thoughrather elementary, but
I must go back to business, Watson. Would youmind reading me the advertised
description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?”I held the little printed slip to the light.
“Missing,” it said, “onthe morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer
Angel. Aboutfive ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sallow complexion,
blackhair, a little bald in the centre, bushy, black side-whiskers andmoustache;
tinted glasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was dressed,when last seen, in black
frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat,gold Albert chain, and grey Harris
tweed trousers, with brown gaitersover elastic-sided boots. Known to have been
employed in an office inLeadenhall Street. Anybody bringing,” &c, &c.“That will
do,” said Holmes. “As to the letters,” he continued,glancing over them, “they
are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue inthem to Mr. Angel, save that he
quotes Balzac once. There is oneremarkable point, however, which will no doubt
strike you.”“They are typewritten,” I remarked.“Not only that, but the signature
is typewritten. Look at the neatlittle ‘Hosmer Angel’ at the bottom. There is a
date, you see, but nosuperscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather
vague. Thepoint about the signature is very suggestive—in fact, we may call
itconclusive.”“Of what?”“My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how
strongly it bearsupon the case?”“I cannot say that I do unless it were that he
wished to be able todeny his signature if an action for breach of promise were
instituted.”“No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters,
whichshould settle the matter. One is to a firm in the City, the other is tothe
young lady’s stepfather, Mr. Windibank, asking him whether he couldmeet us here
at six o’clock to-morrow evening. It is just as well thatwe should do business
with the male relatives. And now, Doctor, we cando nothing until the answers to
those letters come, so we may put ourlittle problem upon the shelf for the
interim.”I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend’s subtle powers
ofreasoning and extraordinary energy in action that I felt that he musthave some
solid grounds for the assured and easy demeanour with whichhe treated the
singular mystery which he had been called upon tofathom. Once only had I known
him to fail, in the case of the King ofBohemia and of the Irene Adler
photograph; but when I looked back tothe weird business of the Sign of Four, and
the extraordinarycircumstances connected with the Study in Scarlet, I felt that
it wouldbe a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.I left him then,
still puffing at his black clay pipe, with theconviction that when I came again
on the next evening I would find thathe held in his hands all the clues which
would lead up to the identityof the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary
Sutherland.A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention
atthe time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of thesufferer.
It was not until close upon six o’clock that I found myselffree and was able to
spring into a hansom and drive to Baker Street,half afraid that I might be too
late to assist at the _dénouement_ ofthe little mystery. I found Sherlock Holmes
alone, however, halfasleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses
of hisarmchair. A formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, with thepungent
cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spenthis day in the
chemical work which was so dear to him.“Well, have you solved it?” I asked as I
entered.“Yes. It was the bisulphate of baryta.”“No, no, the mystery!” I
cried.“Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. Therewas
never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday, someof the details
are of interest. The only drawback is that there is nolaw, I fear, that can
touch the scoundrel.”“Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting
MissSutherland?”The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet
openedhis lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the passage and atap
at the door.“This is the girl’s stepfather, Mr. James Windibank,” said Holmes.
“Hehas written to me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!”The man who
entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirtyyears of age,
clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a bland,insinuating manner, and a pair of
wonderfully sharp and penetratinggrey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each
of us, placed his shinytop-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled
down into thenearest chair.“Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank,” said Holmes. “I
think that thistypewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment
withme for six o’clock?”“Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am
not quite myown master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland has troubled
youabout this little matter, for I think it is far better not to washlinen of
the sort in public. It was quite against my wishes that shecame, but she is a
very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may havenoticed, and she is not easily
controlled when she has made up her mindon a point. Of course, I did not mind
you so much, as you are notconnected with the official police, but it is not
pleasant to have afamily misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a
uselessexpense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?”“On the
contrary,” said Holmes quietly; “I have every reason to believethat I will
succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel.”Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and
dropped his gloves. “I amdelighted to hear it,” he said.“It is a curious thing,”
remarked Holmes, “that a typewriter has reallyquite as much individuality as a
man’s handwriting. Unless they arequite new, no two of them write exactly alike.
Some letters get moreworn than others, and some wear only on one side. Now, you
remark inthis note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case there is
somelittle slurring over of the ‘e,’ and a slight defect in the tail of the‘r.’
There are fourteen other characteristics, but those are the moreobvious.”“We do
all our correspondence with this machine at the office, and nodoubt it is a
little worn,” our visitor answered, glancing keenly atHolmes with his bright
little eyes.“And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study,
Mr.Windibank,” Holmes continued. “I think of writing another littlemonograph
some of these days on the typewriter and its relation tocrime. It is a subject
to which I have devoted some little attention. Ihave here four letters which
purport to come from the missing man. Theyare all typewritten. In each case, not
only are the ‘e’s’ slurred andthe ‘r’s’ tailless, but you will observe, if you
care to use mymagnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics to which
Ihave alluded are there as well.”Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and
picked up his hat. “I cannotwaste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr.
Holmes,” he said. “Ifyou can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you
have doneit.”“Certainly,” said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in
thedoor. “I let you know, then, that I have caught him!”“What! where?” shouted
Mr. Windibank, turning white to his lips andglancing about him like a rat in a
trap.“Oh, it won’t do—really it won’t,” said Holmes suavely. “There is
nopossible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too transparent,and it
was a very bad compliment when you said that it was impossiblefor me to solve so
simple a question. That’s right! Sit down and let ustalk it over.”Our visitor
collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glitterof moisture on his
brow. “It—it’s not actionable,” he stammered.“I am very much afraid that it is
not. But between ourselves,Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless
a trick in a pettyway as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over the
course ofevents, and you will contradict me if I go wrong.”The man sat huddled
up in his chair, with his head sunk upon hisbreast, like one who is utterly
crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up onthe corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning
back with his hands in hispockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it
seemed, than to us.“The man married a woman very much older than himself for her
money,”said he, “and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as longas
she lived with them. It was a considerable sum, for people in theirposition, and
the loss of it would have made a serious difference. Itwas worth an effort to
preserve it. The daughter was of a good, amiabledisposition, but affectionate
and warm-hearted in her ways, so that itwas evident that with her fair personal
advantages, and her littleincome, she would not be allowed to remain single
long. Now hermarriage would mean, of course, the loss of a hundred a year, so
whatdoes her stepfather do to prevent it? He takes the obvious course ofkeeping
her at home and forbidding her to seek the company of people ofher own age. But
soon he found that that would not answer forever. Shebecame restive, insisted
upon her rights, and finally announced herpositive intention of going to a
certain ball. What does her cleverstepfather do then? He conceives an idea more
creditable to his headthan to his heart. With the connivance and assistance of
his wife hedisguised himself, covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses,
maskedthe face with a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that
clearvoice into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of
thegirl’s short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off otherlovers
by making love himself.”“It was only a joke at first,” groaned our visitor. “We
never thoughtthat she would have been so carried away.”“Very likely not. However
that may be, the young lady was verydecidedly carried away, and, having quite
made up her mind that herstepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery
never for aninstant entered her mind. She was flattered by the
gentleman’sattentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly
expressedadmiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it
wasobvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if areal
effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and anengagement, which would
finally secure the girl’s affections fromturning towards anyone else. But the
deception could not be kept upforever. These pretended journeys to France were
rather cumbrous. Thething to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in
such adramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon theyoung
lady’s mind and prevent her from looking upon any other suitorfor some time to
come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon aTestament, and hence also the
allusions to a possibility of somethinghappening on the very morning of the
wedding. James Windibank wishedMiss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel,
and so uncertain as tohis fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she
would not listento another man. As far as the church door he brought her, and
then, ashe could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the old trickof
stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the other. Ithink that was
the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!”Our visitor had recovered something of his
assurance while Holmes hadbeen talking, and he rose from his chair now with a
cold sneer upon hispale face.“It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes,” said he,
“but if you are sovery sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you
who arebreaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionable fromthe
first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourselfopen to an
action for assault and illegal constraint.”“The law cannot, as you say, touch
you,” said Holmes, unlocking andthrowing open the door, “yet there never was a
man who deservedpunishment more. If the young lady has a brother or a friend, he
oughtto lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!” he continued, flushingup at
the sight of the bitter sneer upon the man’s face, “it is notpart of my duties
to my client, but here’s a hunting crop handy, and Ithink I shall just treat
myself to—” He took two swift steps to thewhip, but before he could grasp it
there was a wild clatter of stepsupon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged,
and from the window wecould see Mr. James Windibank running at the top of his
speed down theroad.“There’s a cold-blooded scoundrel!” said Holmes, laughing, as
he threwhimself down into his chair once more. “That fellow will rise fromcrime
to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a gallows.The case has,
in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest.”“I cannot now entirely
see all the steps of your reasoning,” Iremarked.“Well, of course it was obvious
from the first that this Mr. HosmerAngel must have some strong object for his
curious conduct, and it wasequally clear that the only man who really profited
by the incident, asfar as we could see, was the stepfather. Then the fact that
the two menwere never together, but that the one always appeared when the
otherwas away, was suggestive. So were the tinted spectacles and the
curiousvoice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers.
Mysuspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar action in typewriting
hissignature, which, of course, inferred that his handwriting was sofamiliar to
her that she would recognise even the smallest sample ofit. You see all these
isolated facts, together with many minor ones,all pointed in the same
direction.”“And how did you verify them?”“Having once spotted my man, it was
easy to get corroboration. I knewthe firm for which this man worked. Having
taken the printeddescription. I eliminated everything from it which could be the
resultof a disguise—the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I sent it tothe
firm, with a request that they would inform me whether it answeredto the
description of any of their travellers. I had already noticedthe peculiarities
of the typewriter, and I wrote to the man himself athis business address asking
him if he would come here. As I expected,his reply was typewritten and revealed
the same trivial butcharacteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter
fromWesthouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the descriptiontallied
in every respect with that of their employé, James Windibank._Voilà tout_!”“And
Miss Sutherland?”“If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the
oldPersian saying, ‘There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub, anddanger
also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.’ There is asmuch sense in Hafiz
as in Horace, and as much knowledge of the world.”IV. THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY
MYSTERYWe were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when the
maidbrought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes and ran in this way:“Have
you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for from thewest of England
in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shall beglad if you will come with
me. Air and scenery perfect. LeavePaddington by the 11:15.”“What do you say,
dear?” said my wife, looking across at me. “Will yougo?”“I really don’t know
what to say. I have a fairly long list atpresent.”“Oh, Anstruther would do your
work for you. You have been looking alittle pale lately. I think that the change
would do you good, and youare always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes’
cases.”“I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained through oneof
them,” I answered. “But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for Ihave only half
an hour.”My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effectof
making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants were few andsimple, so that in
less than the time stated I was in a cab with myvalise, rattling away to
Paddington Station. Sherlock Holmes was pacingup and down the platform, his
tall, gaunt figure made even gaunter andtaller by his long grey travelling-cloak
and close-fitting cloth cap.“It is really very good of you to come, Watson,”
said he. “It makes aconsiderable difference to me, having someone with me on
whom I canthoroughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless or else
biassed.If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the tickets.”We had
the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of paperswhich Holmes had
brought with him. Among these he rummaged and read,with intervals of note-taking
and of meditation, until we were pastReading. Then he suddenly rolled them all
into a gigantic ball andtossed them up onto the rack.“Have you heard anything of
the case?” he asked.“Not a word. I have not seen a paper for some days.”“The
London press has not had very full accounts. I have just beenlooking through all
the recent papers in order to master theparticulars. It seems, from what I
gather, to be one of those simplecases which are so extremely difficult.”“That
sounds a little paradoxical.”“But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost
invariably a clue.The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more
difficult itis to bring it home. In this case, however, they have established
avery serious case against the son of the murdered man.”“It is a murder,
then?”“Well, it is conjectured to be so. I shall take nothing for granteduntil I
have the opportunity of looking personally into it. I willexplain the state of
things to you, as far as I have been able tounderstand it, in a very few
words.“Boscombe Valley is a country district not very far from Ross,
inHerefordshire. The largest landed proprietor in that part is a Mr. JohnTurner,
who made his money in Australia and returned some years ago tothe old country.
One of the farms which he held, that of Hatherley, waslet to Mr. Charles
McCarthy, who was also an ex-Australian. The men hadknown each other in the
colonies, so that it was not unnatural thatwhen they came to settle down they
should do so as near each other aspossible. Turner was apparently the richer
man, so McCarthy became histenant but still remained, it seems, upon terms of
perfect equality, asthey were frequently together. McCarthy had one son, a lad
of eighteen,and Turner had an only daughter of the same age, but neither of
themhad wives living. They appear to have avoided the society of theneighbouring
English families and to have led retired lives, thoughboth the McCarthys were
fond of sport and were frequently seen at therace-meetings of the neighbourhood.
McCarthy kept two servants—a manand a girl. Turner had a considerable household,
some half-dozen at theleast. That is as much as I have been able to gather about
thefamilies. Now for the facts.“On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy
left his house atHatherley about three in the afternoon and walked down to the
BoscombePool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading out of the
streamwhich runs down the Boscombe Valley. He had been out with hisserving-man
in the morning at Ross, and he had told the man that hemust hurry, as he had an
appointment of importance to keep at three.From that appointment he never came
back alive.“From Hatherley Farmhouse to the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of a
mile,and two people saw him as he passed over this ground. One was an oldwoman,
whose name is not mentioned, and the other was William Crowder,a game-keeper in
the employ of Mr. Turner. Both these witnesses deposethat Mr. McCarthy was
walking alone. The game-keeper adds that within afew minutes of his seeing Mr.
McCarthy pass he had seen his son, Mr.James McCarthy, going the same way with a
gun under his arm. To thebest of his belief, the father was actually in sight at
the time, andthe son was following him. He thought no more of the matter until
heheard in the evening of the tragedy that had occurred.“The two McCarthys were
seen after the time when William Crowder, thegame-keeper, lost sight of them.
The Boscombe Pool is thickly woodedround, with just a fringe of grass and of
reeds round the edge. A girlof fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of
the lodge-keeper ofthe Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woods picking
flowers.She states that while she was there she saw, at the border of the
woodand close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son, and that they appearedto be
having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder usingvery strong
language to his son, and she saw the latter raise up hishand as if to strike his
father. She was so frightened by theirviolence that she ran away and told her
mother when she reached homethat she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling near
Boscombe Pool, andthat she was afraid that they were going to fight. She had
hardly saidthe words when young Mr. McCarthy came running up to the lodge to
saythat he had found his father dead in the wood, and to ask for the helpof the
lodge-keeper. He was much excited, without either his gun or hishat, and his
right hand and sleeve were observed to be stained withfresh blood. On following
him they found the dead body stretched outupon the grass beside the pool. The
head had been beaten in by repeatedblows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The
injuries were such as mightvery well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his
son’s gun, whichwas found lying on the grass within a few paces of the body.
Underthese circumstances the young man was instantly arrested, and a verdictof
‘wilful murder’ having been returned at the inquest on Tuesday, hewas on
Wednesday brought before the magistrates at Ross, who havereferred the case to
the next Assizes. Those are the main facts of thecase as they came out before
the coroner and the police-court.”“I could hardly imagine a more damning case,”
I remarked. “If evercircumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so
here.”“Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing,” answered
Holmesthoughtfully. “It may seem to point very straight to one thing, but ifyou
shift your own point of view a little, you may find it pointing inan equally
uncompromising manner to something entirely different. Itmust be confessed,
however, that the case looks exceedingly graveagainst the young man, and it is
very possible that he is indeed theculprit. There are several people in the
neighbourhood, however, andamong them Miss Turner, the daughter of the
neighbouring landowner, whobelieve in his innocence, and who have retained
Lestrade, whom you mayrecollect in connection with the Study in Scarlet, to work
out the casein his interest. Lestrade, being rather puzzled, has referred the
caseto me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gentlemen are flyingwestward at
fifty miles an hour instead of quietly digesting theirbreakfasts at home.”“I am
afraid,” said I, “that the facts are so obvious that you willfind little credit
to be gained out of this case.”“There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious
fact,” he answered,laughing. “Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other
obvious factswhich may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You know
metoo well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shall eitherconfirm or
destroy his theory by means which he is quite incapable ofemploying, or even of
understanding. To take the first example to hand,I very clearly perceive that in
your bedroom the window is upon theright-hand side, and yet I question whether
Mr. Lestrade would havenoted even so self-evident a thing as that.”“How on
earth—”“My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness
whichcharacterises you. You shave every morning, and in this season youshave by
the sunlight; but since your shaving is less and less completeas we get farther
back on the left side, until it becomes positivelyslovenly as we get round the
angle of the jaw, it is surely very clearthat that side is less illuminated than
the other. I could not imaginea man of your habits looking at himself in an
equal light and beingsatisfied with such a result. I only quote this as a
trivial example ofobservation and inference. Therein lies my _métier_, and it is
justpossible that it may be of some service in the investigation which
liesbefore us. There are one or two minor points which were brought out inthe
inquest, and which are worth considering.”“What are they?”“It appears that his
arrest did not take place at once, but after thereturn to Hatherley Farm. On the
inspector of constabulary informinghim that he was a prisoner, he remarked that
he was not surprised tohear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This
observation ofhis had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which
mighthave remained in the minds of the coroner’s jury.”“It was a confession,” I
ejaculated.“No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence.”“Coming on
the top of such a damning series of events, it was at leasta most suspicious
remark.”“On the contrary,” said Holmes, “it is the brightest rift which I canat
present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be, he couldnot be such an
absolute imbecile as not to see that the circumstanceswere very black against
him. Had he appeared surprised at his ownarrest, or feigned indignation at it, I
should have looked upon it ashighly suspicious, because such surprise or anger
would not be naturalunder the circumstances, and yet might appear to be the best
policy toa scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation marks him
aseither an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraintand
firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, it was also notunnatural if you
consider that he stood beside the dead body of hisfather, and that there is no
doubt that he had that very day so farforgotten his filial duty as to bandy
words with him, and even,according to the little girl whose evidence is so
important, to raisehis hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and
contrition whichare displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of a
healthymind rather than of a guilty one.”I shook my head. “Many men have been
hanged on far slighter evidence,”I remarked.“So they have. And many men have
been wrongfully hanged.”“What is the young man’s own account of the matter?”“It
is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters, thoughthere are one or
two points in it which are suggestive. You will findit here, and may read it for
yourself.”He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire
paper,and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the paragraph in whichthe
unfortunate young man had given his own statement of what hadoccurred. I settled
myself down in the corner of the carriage and readit very carefully. It ran in
this way:“Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called
andgave evidence as follows: ‘I had been away from home for three days
atBristol, and had only just returned upon the morning of last Monday,the 3rd.
My father was absent from home at the time of my arrival, andI was informed by
the maid that he had driven over to Ross with JohnCobb, the groom. Shortly after
my return I heard the wheels of his trapin the yard, and, looking out of my
window, I saw him get out and walkrapidly out of the yard, though I was not
aware in which direction hewas going. I then took my gun and strolled out in the
direction of theBoscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting the rabbit warren
whichis upon the other side. On my way I saw William Crowder, thegame-keeper, as
he had stated in his evidence; but he is mistaken inthinking that I was
following my father. I had no idea that he was infront of me. When about a
hundred yards from the pool I heard a cry of“Cooee!” which was a usual signal
between my father and myself. I thenhurried forward, and found him standing by
the pool. He appeared to bemuch surprised at seeing me and asked me rather
roughly what I wasdoing there. A conversation ensued which led to high words and
almostto blows, for my father was a man of a very violent temper. Seeing thathis
passion was becoming ungovernable, I left him and returned towardsHatherley
Farm. I had not gone more than 150 yards, however, when Iheard a hideous outcry
behind me, which caused me to run back again. Ifound my father expiring upon the
ground, with his head terriblyinjured. I dropped my gun and held him in my arms,
but he almostinstantly expired. I knelt beside him for some minutes, and then
mademy way to Mr. Turner’s lodge-keeper, his house being the nearest, toask for
assistance. I saw no one near my father when I returned, and Ihave no idea how
he came by his injuries. He was not a popular man,being somewhat cold and
forbidding in his manners, but he had, as faras I know, no active enemies. I
know nothing further of the matter.’“The Coroner: Did your father make any
statement to you before he died?“Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could
only catch some allusionto a rat.“The Coroner: What did you understand by
that?“Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he wasdelirious.“The
Coroner: What was the point upon which you and your father hadthis final
quarrel?“Witness: I should prefer not to answer.“The Coroner: I am afraid that I
must press it.“Witness: It is really impossible for me to tell you. I can assure
youthat it has nothing to do with the sad tragedy which followed.“The Coroner:
That is for the court to decide. I need not point out toyou that your refusal to
answer will prejudice your case considerablyin any future proceedings which may
arise.“Witness: I must still refuse.“The Coroner: I understand that the cry of
‘Cooee’ was a common signalbetween you and your father?“Witness: It was.“The
Coroner: How was it, then, that he uttered it before he saw you,and before he
even knew that you had returned from Bristol?“Witness (with considerable
confusion): I do not know.“A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your
suspicions when youreturned on hearing the cry and found your father fatally
injured?“Witness: Nothing definite.“The Coroner: What do you mean?“Witness: I
was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into the open,that I could think of
nothing except of my father. Yet I have a vagueimpression that as I ran forward
something lay upon the ground to theleft of me. It seemed to me to be something
grey in colour, a coat ofsome sort, or a plaid perhaps. When I rose from my
father I lookedround for it, but it was gone.“‘Do you mean that it disappeared
before you went for help?’“‘Yes, it was gone.’“‘You cannot say what it
was?’“‘No, I had a feeling something was there.’“‘How far from the body?’“‘A
dozen yards or so.’“‘And how far from the edge of the wood?’“‘About the
same.’“‘Then if it was removed it was while you were within a dozen yards
ofit?’“‘Yes, but with my back towards it.’“This concluded the examination of the
witness.”“I see,” said I as I glanced down the column, “that the coroner in
hisconcluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy. He callsattention,
and with reason, to the discrepancy about his father havingsignalled to him
before seeing him, also to his refusal to give detailsof his conversation with
his father, and his singular account of hisfather’s dying words. They are all,
as he remarks, very much againstthe son.”Holmes laughed softly to himself and
stretched himself out upon thecushioned seat. “Both you and the coroner have
been at some pains,”said he, “to single out the very strongest points in the
young man’sfavour. Don’t you see that you alternately give him credit for
havingtoo much imagination and too little? Too little, if he could not inventa
cause of quarrel which would give him the sympathy of the jury; toomuch, if he
evolved from his own inner consciousness anything so_outré_ as a dying reference
to a rat, and the incident of thevanishing cloth. No, sir, I shall approach this
case from the point ofview that what this young man says is true, and we shall
see whitherthat hypothesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket Petrarch,
andnot another word shall I say of this case until we are on the scene ofaction.
We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall be there in twentyminutes.”It was
nearly four o’clock when we at last, after passing through thebeautiful Stroud
Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn, foundourselves at the pretty little
country-town of Ross. A lean,ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was
waiting for us upon theplatform. In spite of the light brown dustcoat and
leather-leggingswhich he wore in deference to his rustic surroundings, I had
nodifficulty in recognising Lestrade, of Scotland Yard. With him we droveto the
Hereford Arms where a room had already been engaged for us.“I have ordered a
carriage,” said Lestrade as we sat over a cup of tea.“I knew your energetic
nature, and that you would not be happy untilyou had been on the scene of the
crime.”“It was very nice and complimentary of you,” Holmes answered. “It
isentirely a question of barometric pressure.”Lestrade looked startled. “I do
not quite follow,” he said.“How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and
not a cloud in thesky. I have a caseful of cigarettes here which need smoking,
and thesofa is very much superior to the usual country hotel abomination. I
donot think that it is probable that I shall use the carriage to-night.”Lestrade
laughed indulgently. “You have, no doubt, already formed yourconclusions from
the newspapers,” he said. “The case is as plain as apikestaff, and the more one
goes into it the plainer it becomes. Still,of course, one can’t refuse a lady,
and such a very positive one, too.She has heard of you, and would have your
opinion, though I repeatedlytold her that there was nothing which you could do
which I had notalready done. Why, bless my soul! here is her carriage at the
door.”He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the
mostlovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her violet eyesshining,
her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all thought ofher natural reserve
lost in her overpowering excitement and concern.“Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!” she
cried, glancing from one to the other ofus, and finally, with a woman’s quick
intuition, fastening upon mycompanion, “I am so glad that you have come. I have
driven down to tellyou so. I know that James didn’t do it. I know it, and I want
you tostart upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt uponthat
point. We have known each other since we were little children, andI know his
faults as no one else does; but he is too tender-hearted tohurt a fly. Such a
charge is absurd to anyone who really knows him.”“I hope we may clear him, Miss
Turner,” said Sherlock Holmes. “You mayrely upon my doing all that I can.”“But
you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Doyou not see some
loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think that heis innocent?”“I think that
it is very probable.”“There, now!” she cried, throwing back her head and looking
defiantlyat Lestrade. “You hear! He gives me hopes.”Lestrade shrugged his
shoulders. “I am afraid that my colleague hasbeen a little quick in forming his
conclusions,” he said.“But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never
did it. Andabout his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason why
hewould not speak about it to the coroner was because I was concerned init.”“In
what way?” asked Holmes.“It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his
father had manydisagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there
shouldbe a marriage between us. James and I have always loved each other
asbrother and sister; but of course he is young and has seen very littleof life
yet, and—and—well, he naturally did not wish to do anythinglike that yet. So
there were quarrels, and this, I am sure, was one ofthem.”“And your father?”
asked Holmes. “Was he in favour of such a union?”“No, he was averse to it also.
No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favour ofit.” A quick blush passed over her fresh
young face as Holmes shot oneof his keen, questioning glances at her.“Thank you
for this information,” said he. “May I see your father if Icall to-morrow?”“I am
afraid the doctor won’t allow it.”“The doctor?”“Yes, have you not heard? Poor
father has never been strong for yearsback, but this has broken him down
completely. He has taken to his bed,and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and
that his nervous system isshattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had
known dad in theold days in Victoria.”“Ha! In Victoria! That is important.”“Yes,
at the mines.”“Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I understand, Mr. Turner
madehis money.”“Yes, certainly.”“Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of
material assistance to me.”“You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No
doubt you will goto the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell
him thatI know him to be innocent.”“I will, Miss Turner.”“I must go home now,
for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if Ileave him. Good-bye, and God help
you in your undertaking.” She hurriedfrom the room as impulsively as she had
entered, and we heard thewheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.“I am
ashamed of you, Holmes,” said Lestrade with dignity after a fewminutes’ silence.
“Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound todisappoint? I am not
over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel.”“I think that I see my way to
clearing James McCarthy,” said Holmes.“Have you an order to see him in
prison?”“Yes, but only for you and me.”“Then I shall reconsider my resolution
about going out. We have stilltime to take a train to Hereford and see him
to-night?”“Ample.”“Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very
slow, butI shall only be away a couple of hours.”I walked down to the station
with them, and then wandered through thestreets of the little town, finally
returning to the hotel, where I layupon the sofa and tried to interest myself in
a yellow-backed novel.The puny plot of the story was so thin, however, when
compared to thedeep mystery through which we were groping, and I found my
attentionwander so continually from the action to the fact, that I at last
flungit across the room and gave myself up entirely to a consideration ofthe
events of the day. Supposing that this unhappy young man’s storywere absolutely
true, then what hellish thing, what absolutelyunforeseen and extraordinary
calamity could have occurred between thetime when he parted from his father, and
the moment when, drawn back byhis screams, he rushed into the glade? It was
something terrible anddeadly. What could it be? Might not the nature of the
injuries revealsomething to my medical instincts? I rang the bell and called for
theweekly county paper, which contained a verbatim account of the inquest.In the
surgeon’s deposition it was stated that the posterior third ofthe left parietal
bone and the left half of the occipital bone had beenshattered by a heavy blow
from a blunt weapon. I marked the spot uponmy own head. Clearly such a blow must
have been struck from behind.That was to some extent in favour of the accused,
as when seenquarrelling he was face to face with his father. Still, it did not
gofor very much, for the older man might have turned his back before theblow
fell. Still, it might be worth while to call Holmes’ attention toit. Then there
was the peculiar dying reference to a rat. What couldthat mean? It could not be
delirium. A man dying from a sudden blowdoes not commonly become delirious. No,
it was more likely to be anattempt to explain how he met his fate. But what
could it indicate? Icudgelled my brains to find some possible explanation. And
then theincident of the grey cloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were truethe
murderer must have dropped some part of his dress, presumably hisovercoat, in
his flight, and must have had the hardihood to return andto carry it away at the
instant when the son was kneeling with his backturned not a dozen paces off.
What a tissue of mysteries andimprobabilities the whole thing was! I did not
wonder at Lestrade’sopinion, and yet I had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes’
insight that Icould not lose hope as long as every fresh fact seemed to
strengthenhis conviction of young McCarthy’s innocence.It was late before
Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone, forLestrade was staying in
lodgings in the town.“The glass still keeps very high,” he remarked as he sat
down. “It isof importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over
theground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and keenestfor
such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged bya long
journey. I have seen young McCarthy.”“And what did you learn from
him?”“Nothing.”“Could he throw no light?”“None at all. I was inclined to think
at one time that he knew who haddone it and was screening him or her, but I am
convinced now that he isas puzzled as everyone else. He is not a very
quick-witted youth,though comely to look at and, I should think, sound at
heart.”“I cannot admire his taste,” I remarked, “if it is indeed a fact thathe
was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as this MissTurner.”“Ah,
thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly,insanely, in love with
her, but some two years ago, when he was only alad, and before he really knew
her, for she had been away five years ata boarding-school, what does the idiot
do but get into the clutches ofa barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a registry
office? No one knows aword of the matter, but you can imagine how maddening it
must be to himto be upbraided for not doing what he would give his very eyes to
do,but what he knows to be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzy ofthis
sort which made him throw his hands up into the air when hisfather, at their
last interview, was goading him on to propose to MissTurner. On the other hand,
he had no means of supporting himself, andhis father, who was by all accounts a
very hard man, would have thrownhim over utterly had he known the truth. It was
with his barmaid wifethat he had spent the last three days in Bristol, and his
father didnot know where he was. Mark that point. It is of importance. Good
hascome out of evil, however, for the barmaid, finding from the papersthat he is
in serious trouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown himover utterly and has
written to him to say that she has a husbandalready in the Bermuda Dockyard, so
that there is really no tie betweenthem. I think that that bit of news has
consoled young McCarthy for allthat he has suffered.”“But if he is innocent, who
has done it?”“Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to two
points.One is that the murdered man had an appointment with someone at thepool,
and that the someone could not have been his son, for his son wasaway, and he
did not know when he would return. The second is that themurdered man was heard
to cry ‘Cooee!’ before he knew that his son hadreturned. Those are the crucial
points upon which the case depends. Andnow let us talk about George Meredith, if
you please, and we shallleave all minor matters until to-morrow.”There was no
rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning broke brightand cloudless. At nine
o’clock Lestrade called for us with thecarriage, and we set off for Hatherley
Farm and the Boscombe Pool.“There is serious news this morning,” Lestrade
observed. “It is saidthat Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is
despaired of.”“An elderly man, I presume?” said Holmes.“About sixty; but his
constitution has been shattered by his lifeabroad, and he has been in failing
health for some time. This businesshas had a very bad effect upon him. He was an
old friend of McCarthy’s,and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I have
learned that hegave him Hatherley Farm rent free.”“Indeed! That is interesting,”
said Holmes.“Oh, yes! In a hundred other ways he has helped him. Everybody
abouthere speaks of his kindness to him.”“Really! Does it not strike you as a
little singular that thisMcCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own,
and to have beenunder such obligations to Turner, should still talk of marrying
his sonto Turner’s daughter, who is, presumably, heiress to the estate, andthat
in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely a case of aproposal and all
else would follow? It is the more strange, since weknow that Turner himself was
averse to the idea. The daughter told usas much. Do you not deduce something
from that?”“We have got to the deductions and the inferences,” said
Lestrade,winking at me. “I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes,
withoutflying away after theories and fancies.”“You are right,” said Holmes
demurely; “you do find it very hard totackle the facts.”“Anyhow, I have grasped
one fact which you seem to find it difficult toget hold of,” replied Lestrade
with some warmth.“And that is—”“That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy
junior and that alltheories to the contrary are the merest moonshine.”“Well,
moonshine is a brighter thing than fog,” said Holmes, laughing.“But I am very
much mistaken if this is not Hatherley Farm upon theleft.”“Yes, that is it.” It
was a widespread, comfortable-looking building,two-storied, slate-roofed, with
great yellow blotches of lichen uponthe grey walls. The drawn blinds and the
smokeless chimneys, however,gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of
this horror still layheavy upon it. We called at the door, when the maid, at
Holmes’request, showed us the boots which her master wore at the time of
hisdeath, and also a pair of the son’s, though not the pair which he hadthen
had. Having measured these very carefully from seven or eightdifferent points,
Holmes desired to be led to the court-yard, fromwhich we all followed the
winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he
was hot upon such a scent asthis. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and
logician of BakerStreet would have failed to recognise him. His face flushed
anddarkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines, while hiseyes shone
out from beneath them with a steely glitter. His face wasbent downward, his
shoulders bowed, his lips compressed, and the veinsstood out like whipcord in
his long, sinewy neck. His nostrils seemedto dilate with a purely animal lust
for the chase, and his mind was soabsolutely concentrated upon the matter before
him that a question orremark fell unheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only
provoked aquick, impatient snarl in reply. Swiftly and silently he made his
wayalong the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way of thewoods to
the Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as is all thatdistrict, and there
were marks of many feet, both upon the path andamid the short grass which
bounded it on either side. Sometimes Holmeswould hurry on, sometimes stop dead,
and once he made quite a littledetour into the meadow. Lestrade and I walked
behind him, the detectiveindifferent and contemptuous, while I watched my friend
with theinterest which sprang from the conviction that every one of his
actionswas directed towards a definite end.The Boscombe Pool, which is a little
reed-girt sheet of water somefifty yards across, is situated at the boundary
between the HatherleyFarm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner. Above
the woodswhich lined it upon the farther side we could see the red,
juttingpinnacles which marked the site of the rich landowner’s dwelling. Onthe
Hatherley side of the pool the woods grew very thick, and there wasa narrow belt
of sodden grass twenty paces across between the edge ofthe trees and the reeds
which lined the lake. Lestrade showed us theexact spot at which the body had
been found, and, indeed, so moist wasthe ground, that I could plainly see the
traces which had been left bythe fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could
see by his eagerface and peering eyes, very many other things were to be read
upon thetrampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who is picking up a scent,
andthen turned upon my companion.“What did you go into the pool for?” he
asked.“I fished about with a rake. I thought there might be some weapon orother
trace. But how on earth—”“Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours
with its inwardtwist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there
itvanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had Ibeen here
before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowed all overit. Here is where
the party with the lodge-keeper came, and they havecovered all tracks for six or
eight feet round the body. But here arethree separate tracks of the same feet.”
He drew out a lens and laydown upon his waterproof to have a better view,
talking all the timerather to himself than to us. “These are young McCarthy’s
feet. Twicehe was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles are
deeplymarked and the heels hardly visible. That bears out his story. He ranwhen
he saw his father on the ground. Then here are the father’s feetas he paced up
and down. What is this, then? It is the butt-end of thegun as the son stood
listening. And this? Ha, ha! What have we here?Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too,
quite unusual boots! They come, they go,they come again—of course that was for
the cloak. Now where did theycome from?” He ran up and down, sometimes losing,
sometimes finding thetrack until we were well within the edge of the wood and
under theshadow of a great beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood.
Holmestraced his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more uponhis
face with a little cry of satisfaction. For a long time he remainedthere,
turning over the leaves and dried sticks, gathering up whatseemed to me to be
dust into an envelope and examining with his lensnot only the ground but even
the bark of the tree as far as he couldreach. A jagged stone was lying among the
moss, and this also hecarefully examined and retained. Then he followed a
pathway through thewood until he came to the high road, where all traces were
lost.“It has been a case of considerable interest,” he remarked, returningto his
natural manner. “I fancy that this grey house on the right mustbe the lodge. I
think that I will go in and have a word with Moran, andperhaps write a little
note. Having done that, we may drive back to ourluncheon. You may walk to the
cab, and I shall be with you presently.”It was about ten minutes before we
regained our cab and drove back intoRoss, Holmes still carrying with him the
stone which he had picked upin the wood.“This may interest you, Lestrade,” he
remarked, holding it out. “Themurder was done with it.”“I see no marks.”“There
are none.”“How do you know, then?”“The grass was growing under it. It had only
lain there a few days.There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It
correspondswith the injuries. There is no sign of any other weapon.”“And the
murderer?”“Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg,
wearsthick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars, usesa
cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket. There areseveral
other indications, but these may be enough to aid us in oursearch.”Lestrade
laughed. “I am afraid that I am still a sceptic,” he said.“Theories are all very
well, but we have to deal with a hard-headedBritish jury.”“_Nous verrons_,”
answered Holmes calmly. “You work your own method,and I shall work mine. I shall
be busy this afternoon, and shallprobably return to London by the evening
train.”“And leave your case unfinished?”“No, finished.”“But the mystery?”“It is
solved.”“Who was the criminal, then?”“The gentleman I describe.”“But who is
he?”“Surely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such apopulous
neighbourhood.”Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. “I am a practical man,” he said,
“andI really cannot undertake to go about the country looking for aleft-handed
gentleman with a game leg. I should become thelaughing-stock of Scotland
Yard.”“All right,” said Holmes quietly. “I have given you the chance. Hereare
your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line before I leave.”Having left
Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where wefound lunch upon the
table. Holmes was silent and buried in thoughtwith a pained expression upon his
face, as one who finds himself in aperplexing position.“Look here, Watson,” he
said when the cloth was cleared “just sit downin this chair and let me preach to
you for a little. I don’t know quitewhat to do, and I should value your advice.
Light a cigar and let meexpound.” “Pray do so.”“Well, now, in considering this
case there are two points about youngMcCarthy’s narrative which struck us both
instantly, although theyimpressed me in his favour and you against him. One was
the fact thathis father should, according to his account, cry ‘Cooee!’ before
seeinghim. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat. He
mumbledseveral words, you understand, but that was all that caught the son’sear.
Now from this double point our research must commence, and we willbegin it by
presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true.”“What of this ‘Cooee!’
then?”“Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son, asfar
as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that he was withinearshot. The
‘Cooee!’ was meant to attract the attention of whoever itwas that he had the
appointment with. But ‘Cooee’ is a distinctlyAustralian cry, and one which is
used between Australians. There is astrong presumption that the person whom
McCarthy expected to meet himat Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in
Australia.”“What of the rat, then?”Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his
pocket and flattened itout on the table. “This is a map of the Colony of
Victoria,” he said.“I wired to Bristol for it last night.” He put his hand over
part ofthe map. “What do you read?”“ARAT,” I read.“And now?” He raised his
hand.“BALLARAT.”“Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his
son onlycaught the last two syllables. He was trying to utter the name of
hismurderer. So and so, of Ballarat.”“It is wonderful!” I exclaimed.“It is
obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field downconsiderably. The
possession of a grey garment was a third point which,granting the son’s
statement to be correct, was a certainty. We havecome now out of mere vagueness
to the definite conception of anAustralian from Ballarat with a grey
cloak.”“Certainly.”“And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can
only beapproached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could
hardlywander.”“Quite so.”“Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination
of the ground Igained the trifling details which I gave to that imbecile
Lestrade, asto the personality of the criminal.”“But how did you gain them?”“You
know my method. It is founded upon the observation of trifles.”“His height I
know that you might roughly judge from the length of hisstride. His boots, too,
might be told from their traces.”“Yes, they were peculiar boots.”“But his
lameness?”“The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than
hisleft. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limped—he was lame.”“But
his left-handedness.”“You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as
recorded bythe surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from
immediatelybehind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unless
itwere by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree during theinterview
between the father and son. He had even smoked there. I foundthe ash of a cigar,
which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enablesme to pronounce as an Indian
cigar. I have, as you know, devoted someattention to this, and written a little
monograph on the ashes of 140different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette
tobacco. Having foundthe ash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among
the mosswhere he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of the variety whichare
rolled in Rotterdam.”“And the cigar-holder?”“I could see that the end had not
been in his mouth. Therefore he useda holder. The tip had been cut off, not
bitten off, but the cut was nota clean one, so I deduced a blunt
pen-knife.”“Holmes,” I said, “you have drawn a net round this man from which
hecannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly as ifyou had
cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the direction inwhich all this points.
The culprit is—”“Mr. John Turner,” cried the hotel waiter, opening the door of
oursitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.The man who entered was a strange and
impressive figure. His slow,limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance
of decrepitude,and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and his enormous
limbsshowed that he was possessed of unusual strength of body and ofcharacter.
His tangled beard, grizzled hair, and outstanding, droopingeyebrows combined to
give an air of dignity and power to hisappearance, but his face was of an ashen
white, while his lips and thecorners of his nostrils were tinged with a shade of
blue. It was clearto me at a glance that he was in the grip of some deadly and
chronicdisease.“Pray sit down on the sofa,” said Holmes gently. “You had my
note?”“Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished to seeme
here to avoid scandal.”“I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall.”“And
why did you wish to see me?” He looked across at my companion withdespair in his
weary eyes, as though his question was already answered.“Yes,” said Holmes,
answering the look rather than the words. “It isso. I know all about
McCarthy.”The old man sank his face in his hands. “God help me!” he cried. “But
Iwould not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my word thatI would
have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes.”“I am glad to hear you
say so,” said Holmes gravely.“I would have spoken now had it not been for my
dear girl. It wouldbreak her heart—it will break her heart when she hears that I
amarrested.”“It may not come to that,” said Holmes.“What?”“I am no official
agent. I understand that it was your daughter whorequired my presence here, and
I am acting in her interests. YoungMcCarthy must be got off, however.”“I am a
dying man,” said old Turner. “I have had diabetes for years. Mydoctor says it is
a question whether I shall live a month. Yet I wouldrather die under my own roof
than in a gaol.”Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand
and abundle of paper before him. “Just tell us the truth,” he said. “I shalljot
down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here can witness it.Then I could
produce your confession at the last extremity to saveyoung McCarthy. I promise
you that I shall not use it unless it isabsolutely needed.”“It’s as well,” said
the old man; “it’s a question whether I shall liveto the Assizes, so it matters
little to me, but I should wish to spareAlice the shock. And now I will make the
thing clear to you; it hasbeen a long time in the acting, but will not take me
long to tell.“You didn’t know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil incarnate.
Itell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he.His grip
has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blasted mylife. I’ll tell you
first how I came to be in his power.“It was in the early ’60’s at the diggings.
I was a young chap then,hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at
anything; I gotamong bad companions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim,
took tothe bush, and in a word became what you would call over here a
highwayrobber. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life of it,sticking
up a station from time to time, or stopping the wagons on theroad to the
diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat was the name I went under,and our party is
still remembered in the colony as the Ballarat Gang.“One day a gold convoy came
down from Ballarat to Melbourne, and we layin wait for it and attacked it. There
were six troopers and six of us,so it was a close thing, but we emptied four of
their saddles at thefirst volley. Three of our boys were killed, however, before
we got theswag. I put my pistol to the head of the wagon-driver, who was
thisvery man McCarthy. I wish to the Lord that I had shot him then, but Ispared
him, though I saw his wicked little eyes fixed on my face, asthough to remember
every feature. We got away with the gold, becamewealthy men, and made our way
over to England without being suspected.There I parted from my old pals and
determined to settle down to aquiet and respectable life. I bought this estate,
which chanced to bein the market, and I set myself to do a little good with my
money, tomake up for the way in which I had earned it. I married, too, andthough
my wife died young she left me my dear little Alice. Even whenshe was just a
baby her wee hand seemed to lead me down the right pathas nothing else had ever
done. In a word, I turned over a new leaf anddid my best to make up for the
past. All was going well when McCarthylaid his grip upon me.“I had gone up to
town about an investment, and I met him in RegentStreet with hardly a coat to
his back or a boot to his foot.“‘Here we are, Jack,’ says he, touching me on the
arm; ‘we’ll be asgood as a family to you. There’s two of us, me and my son, and
you canhave the keeping of us. If you don’t—it’s a fine, law-abiding countryis
England, and there’s always a policeman within hail.’“Well, down they came to
the west country, there was no shaking themoff, and there they have lived rent
free on my best land ever since.There was no rest for me, no peace, no
forgetfulness; turn where Iwould, there was his cunning, grinning face at my
elbow. It grew worseas Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more afraid of her
knowing mypast than of the police. Whatever he wanted he must have, and
whateverit was I gave him without question, land, money, houses, until at lasthe
asked a thing which I could not give. He asked for Alice.“His son, you see, had
grown up, and so had my girl, and as I was knownto be in weak health, it seemed
a fine stroke to him that his ladshould step into the whole property. But there
I was firm. I would nothave his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that I had any
dislike tothe lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. I stood
firm.McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst. We were to meet atthe
pool midway between our houses to talk it over.“When I went down there I found
him talking with his son, so I smoked acigar and waited behind a tree until he
should be alone. But as Ilistened to his talk all that was black and bitter in
me seemed to comeuppermost. He was urging his son to marry my daughter with as
littleregard for what she might think as if she were a slut from off thestreets.
It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held most dearshould be in the
power of such a man as this. Could I not snap thebond? I was already a dying and
a desperate man. Though clear of mindand fairly strong of limb, I knew that my
own fate was sealed. But mymemory and my girl! Both could be saved if I could
but silence thatfoul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply
as Ihave sinned, I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it. But thatmy girl
should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was morethan I could
suffer. I struck him down with no more compunction than ifhe had been some foul
and venomous beast. His cry brought back his son;but I had gained the cover of
the wood, though I was forced to go backto fetch the cloak which I had dropped
in my flight. That is the truestory, gentlemen, of all that occurred.”“Well, it
is not for me to judge you,” said Holmes as the old mansigned the statement
which had been drawn out. “I pray that we maynever be exposed to such a
temptation.”“I pray not, sir. And what do you intend to do?”“In view of your
health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you willsoon have to answer for
your deed at a higher court than the Assizes. Iwill keep your confession, and if
McCarthy is condemned I shall beforced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen
by mortal eye; andyour secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safe with
us.”“Farewell, then,” said the old man solemnly. “Your own deathbeds, whenthey
come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace which youhave given to
mine.” Tottering and shaking in all his giant frame, hestumbled slowly from the
room.“God help us!” said Holmes after a long silence. “Why does fate playsuch
tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such a case asthis that I do
not think of Baxter’s words, and say, ‘There, but forthe grace of God, goes
Sherlock Holmes.’”James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of
a numberof objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and submitted to
thedefending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven months after ourinterview, but
he is now dead; and there is every prospect that the sonand daughter may come to
live happily together in ignorance of theblack cloud which rests upon their
past.V. THE FIVE ORANGE PIPSWhen I glance over my notes and records of the
Sherlock Holmes casesbetween the years ’82 and ’90, I am faced by so many which
presentstrange and interesting features that it is no easy matter to knowwhich
to choose and which to leave. Some, however, have already gainedpublicity
through the papers, and others have not offered a field forthose peculiar
qualities which my friend possessed in so high a degree,and which it is the
object of these papers to illustrate. Some, too,have baffled his analytical
skill, and would be, as narratives,beginnings without an ending, while others
have been but partiallycleared up, and have their explanations founded rather
upon conjectureand surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear
tohim. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable inits
details and so startling in its results that I am tempted to givesome account of
it in spite of the fact that there are points inconnection with it which never
have been, and probably never will be,entirely cleared up.The year ’87 furnished
us with a long series of cases of greater orless interest, of which I retain the
records. Among my headings underthis one twelve months I find an account of the
adventure of theParadol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who held a
luxuriousclub in the lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of the factsconnected
with the loss of the British barque _Sophy Anderson_, of thesingular adventures
of the Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa, andfinally of the Camberwell
poisoning case. In the latter, as may beremembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by
winding up the dead man’swatch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours
before, and thattherefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time—a
deductionwhich was of the greatest importance in clearing up the case. All
theseI may sketch out at some future date, but none of them present suchsingular
features as the strange train of circumstances which I havenow taken up my pen
to describe.It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales
hadset in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had screamed and therain
had beaten against the windows, so that even here in the heart ofgreat,
hand-made London we were forced to raise our minds for theinstant from the
routine of life and to recognise the presence of thosegreat elemental forces
which shriek at mankind through the bars of hiscivilisation, like untamed beasts
in a cage. As evening drew in, thestorm grew higher and louder, and the wind
cried and sobbed like achild in the chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one
side of thefireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at the other
wasdeep in one of Clark Russell’s fine sea-stories until the howl of thegale
from without seemed to blend with the text, and the splash of therain to
lengthen out into the long swash of the sea waves. My wife wason a visit to her
mother’s, and for a few days I was a dweller oncemore in my old quarters at
Baker Street.“Why,” said I, glancing up at my companion, “that was surely the
bell.Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?”“Except yourself I
have none,” he answered. “I do not encouragevisitors.”“A client, then?”“If so,
it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out onsuch a day and at
such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely tobe some crony of the
landlady’s.”Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came
astep in the passage and a tapping at the door. He stretched out hislong arm to
turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacantchair upon which a
newcomer must sit.“Come in!” said he.The man who entered was young, some
two-and-twenty at the outside,well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of
refinement and delicacyin his bearing. The streaming umbrella which he held in
his hand, andhis long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather through
which hehad come. He looked about him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and
Icould see that his face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of aman who is
weighed down with some great anxiety.“I owe you an apology,” he said, raising
his golden pince-nez to hiseyes. “I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I
have brought sometraces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber.”“Give me
your coat and umbrella,” said Holmes. “They may rest here onthe hook and will be
dry presently. You have come up from thesouth-west, I see.”“Yes, from
Horsham.”“That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is
quitedistinctive.”“I have come for advice.”“That is easily got.”“And help.”“That
is not always so easy.”“I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major
Prendergast howyou saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal.”“Ah, of course. He
was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards.”“He said that you could solve
anything.”“He said too much.”“That you are never beaten.”“I have been beaten
four times—three times by men, and once by awoman.”“But what is that compared
with the number of your successes?”“It is true that I have been generally
successful.”“Then you may be so with me.”“I beg that you will draw your chair up
to the fire and favour me withsome details as to your case.”“It is no ordinary
one.”“None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal.”“And
yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you haveever listened to a
more mysterious and inexplicable chain of eventsthan those which have happened
in my own family.”“You fill me with interest,” said Holmes. “Pray give us the
essentialfacts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as
tothose details which seem to me to be most important.”The young man pulled his
chair up and pushed his wet feet out towardsthe blaze.“My name,” said he, “is
John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, as faras I can understand, little to do
with this awful business. It is ahereditary matter; so in order to give you an
idea of the facts, I mustgo back to the commencement of the affair.“You must
know that my grandfather had two sons—my uncle Elias and myfather Joseph. My
father had a small factory at Coventry, which heenlarged at the time of the
invention of bicycling. He was a patenteeof the Openshaw unbreakable tire, and
his business met with suchsuccess that he was able to sell it and to retire upon
a handsomecompetence.“My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young
man and becamea planter in Florida, where he was reported to have done very
well. Atthe time of the war he fought in Jackson’s army, and afterwards
underHood, where he rose to be a colonel. When Lee laid down his arms myuncle
returned to his plantation, where he remained for three or fouryears. About 1869
or 1870 he came back to Europe and took a smallestate in Sussex, near Horsham.
He had made a very considerable fortunein the States, and his reason for leaving
them was his aversion to thenegroes, and his dislike of the Republican policy in
extending thefranchise to them. He was a singular man, fierce and
quick-tempered,very foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a most
retiringdisposition. During all the years that he lived at Horsham, I doubt
ifever he set foot in the town. He had a garden and two or three fieldsround his
house, and there he would take his exercise, though veryoften for weeks on end
he would never leave his room. He drank a greatdeal of brandy and smoked very
heavily, but he would see no society anddid not want any friends, not even his
own brother.“He didn’t mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the
timewhen he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so. This would bein the
year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years in England. Hebegged my father
to let me live with him and he was very kind to me inhis way. When he was sober
he used to be fond of playing backgammon anddraughts with me, and he would make
me his representative both with theservants and with the tradespeople, so that
by the time that I wassixteen I was quite master of the house. I kept all the
keys and couldgo where I liked and do what I liked, so long as I did not disturb
himin his privacy. There was one singular exception, however, for he had asingle
room, a lumber-room up among the attics, which was invariablylocked, and which
he would never permit either me or anyone else toenter. With a boy’s curiosity I
have peeped through the keyhole, but Iwas never able to see more than such a
collection of old trunks andbundles as would be expected in such a room.“One
day—it was in March, 1883—a letter with a foreign stamp lay uponthe table in
front of the colonel’s plate. It was not a common thingfor him to receive
letters, for his bills were all paid in ready money,and he had no friends of any
sort. ‘From India!’ said he as he took itup, ‘Pondicherry postmark! What can
this be?’ Opening it hurriedly, outthere jumped five little dried orange pips,
which pattered down uponhis plate. I began to laugh at this, but the laugh was
struck from mylips at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen, his eyes
wereprotruding, his skin the colour of putty, and he glared at the envelopewhich
he still held in his trembling hand, ‘K. K. K.!’ he shrieked, andthen, ‘My God,
my God, my sins have overtaken me!’“‘What is it, uncle?’ I cried.“‘Death,’ said
he, and rising from the table he retired to his room,leaving me palpitating with
horror. I took up the envelope and sawscrawled in red ink upon the inner flap,
just above the gum, the letterK three times repeated. There was nothing else
save the five driedpips. What could be the reason of his overpowering terror? I
left thebreakfast-table, and as I ascended the stair I met him coming down
withan old rusty key, which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand,and a
small brass box, like a cashbox, in the other.“‘They may do what they like, but
I’ll checkmate them still,’ said hewith an oath. ‘Tell Mary that I shall want a
fire in my room to-day,and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.’“I did as
he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked to stepup to the room. The
fire was burning brightly, and in the grate therewas a mass of black, fluffy
ashes, as of burned paper, while the brassbox stood open and empty beside it. As
I glanced at the box I noticed,with a start, that upon the lid was printed the
treble K which I hadread in the morning upon the envelope.“‘I wish you, John,’
said my uncle, ‘to witness my will. I leave myestate, with all its advantages
and all its disadvantages, to mybrother, your father, whence it will, no doubt,
descend to you. If youcan enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you
cannot, take myadvice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. I am sorry
togive you such a two-edged thing, but I can’t say what turn things aregoing to
take. Kindly sign the paper where Mr. Fordham shows you.’“I signed the paper as
directed, and the lawyer took it away with him.The singular incident made, as
you may think, the deepest impressionupon me, and I pondered over it and turned
it every way in my mindwithout being able to make anything of it. Yet I could
not shake offthe vague feeling of dread which it left behind, though the
sensationgrew less keen as the weeks passed and nothing happened to disturb
theusual routine of our lives. I could see a change in my uncle, however.He
drank more than ever, and he was less inclined for any sort ofsociety. Most of
his time he would spend in his room, with the doorlocked upon the inside, but
sometimes he would emerge in a sort ofdrunken frenzy and would burst out of the
house and tear about thegarden with a revolver in his hand, screaming out that
he was afraid ofno man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a
pen, byman or devil. When these hot fits were over, however, he would
rushtumultuously in at the door and lock and bar it behind him, like a manwho
can brazen it out no longer against the terror which lies at theroots of his
soul. At such times I have seen his face, even on a coldday, glisten with
moisture, as though it were new raised from a basin.“Well, to come to an end of
the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuseyour patience, there came a night when
he made one of those drunkensallies from which he never came back. We found him,
when we went tosearch for him, face downward in a little green-scummed pool,
which layat the foot of the garden. There was no sign of any violence, and
thewater was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard to hisknown
eccentricity, brought in a verdict of ‘suicide.’ But I, who knewhow he winced
from the very thought of death, had much ado to persuademyself that he had gone
out of his way to meet it. The matter passed,however, and my father entered into
possession of the estate, and ofsome £ 14,000, which lay to his credit at the
bank.”“One moment,” Holmes interposed, “your statement is, I foresee, one ofthe
most remarkable to which I have ever listened. Let me have the dateof the
reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date of hissupposed suicide.”“The
letter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks later,upon the night
of May 2nd.”“Thank you. Pray proceed.”“When my father took over the Horsham
property, he, at my request, madea careful examination of the attic, which had
been always locked up. Wefound the brass box there, although its contents had
been destroyed. Onthe inside of the cover was a paper label, with the initials
of K. K.K. repeated upon it, and ‘Letters, memoranda, receipts, and a
register’written beneath. These, we presume, indicated the nature of the
paperswhich had been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there
wasnothing of much importance in the attic save a great many scatteredpapers and
note-books bearing upon my uncle’s life in America. Some ofthem were of the war
time and showed that he had done his duty well andhad borne the repute of a
brave soldier. Others were of a date duringthe reconstruction of the Southern
states, and were mostly concernedwith politics, for he had evidently taken a
strong part in opposing thecarpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from
the North.“Well, it was the beginning of ’84 when my father came to live
atHorsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the January of’85. On
the fourth day after the new year I heard my father give asharp cry of surprise
as we sat together at the breakfast-table. Therehe was, sitting with a newly
opened envelope in one hand and five driedorange pips in the outstretched palm
of the other one. He had alwayslaughed at what he called my cock-and-bull story
about the colonel, buthe looked very scared and puzzled now that the same thing
had come uponhimself.“‘Why, what on earth does this mean, John?’ he
stammered.“My heart had turned to lead. ‘It is K. K. K.,’ said I.“He looked
inside the envelope. ‘So it is,’ he cried. ‘Here are thevery letters. But what
is this written above them?’“‘Put the papers on the sundial,’ I read, peeping
over his shoulder.“‘What papers? What sundial?’ he asked.“‘The sundial in the
garden. There is no other,’ said I; ‘but thepapers must be those that are
destroyed.’“‘Pooh!’ said he, gripping hard at his courage. ‘We are in a
civilisedland here, and we can’t have tomfoolery of this kind. Where does
thething come from?’“‘From Dundee,’ I answered, glancing at the postmark.“‘Some
preposterous practical joke,’ said he. ‘What have I to do withsundials and
papers? I shall take no notice of such nonsense.’“‘I should certainly speak to
the police,’ I said.“‘And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of the
sort.’“‘Then let me do so?’“‘No, I forbid you. I won’t have a fuss made about
such nonsense.’“It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinate
man. Iwent about, however, with a heart which was full of forebodings.“On the
third day after the coming of the letter my father went fromhome to visit an old
friend of his, Major Freebody, who is in commandof one of the forts upon
Portsdown Hill. I was glad that he should go,for it seemed to me that he was
farther from danger when he was awayfrom home. In that, however, I was in error.
Upon the second day of hisabsence I received a telegram from the major,
imploring me to come atonce. My father had fallen over one of the deep
chalk-pits which aboundin the neighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with a
shattered skull.I hurried to him, but he passed away without having ever
recovered hisconsciousness. He had, as it appears, been returning from Fareham
inthe twilight, and as the country was unknown to him, and the
chalk-pitunfenced, the jury had no hesitation in bringing in a verdict of
‘deathfrom accidental causes.’ Carefully as I examined every fact connectedwith
his death, I was unable to find anything which could suggest theidea of murder.
There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, norobbery, no record of strangers
having been seen upon the roads. Andyet I need not tell you that my mind was far
from at ease, and that Iwas well-nigh certain that some foul plot had been woven
round him.“In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask me why
Idid not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well convinced that ourtroubles
were in some way dependent upon an incident in my uncle’slife, and that the
danger would be as pressing in one house as inanother.“It was in January, ’85,
that my poor father met his end, and two yearsand eight months have elapsed
since then. During that time I have livedhappily at Horsham, and I had begun to
hope that this curse had passedaway from the family, and that it had ended with
the last generation. Ihad begun to take comfort too soon, however; yesterday
morning the blowfell in the very shape in which it had come upon my father.”The
young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, and turningto the table
he shook out upon it five little dried orange pips.“This is the envelope,” he
continued. “The postmark is London—easterndivision. Within are the very words
which were upon my father’s lastmessage: ‘K. K. K.’; and then ‘Put the papers on
the sundial.’”“What have you done?” asked Holmes.“Nothing.”“Nothing?”“To tell
the truth”—he sank his face into his thin, white hands—“I havefelt helpless. I
have felt like one of those poor rabbits when thesnake is writhing towards it. I
seem to be in the grasp of someresistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight
and no precautions canguard against.”“Tut! tut!” cried Sherlock Holmes. “You
must act, man, or you are lost.Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time
for despair.”“I have seen the police.”“Ah!”“But they listened to my story with a
smile. I am convinced that theinspector has formed the opinion that the letters
are all practicaljokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really
accidents, asthe jury stated, and were not to be connected with the
warnings.”Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. “Incredible imbecility!”
hecried.“They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in thehouse
with me.”“Has he come with you to-night?”“No. His orders were to stay in the
house.”Again Holmes raved in the air.“Why did you come to me?” he said, “and,
above all, why did you notcome at once?”“I did not know. It was only to-day that
I spoke to Major Prendergastabout my troubles and was advised by him to come to
you.”“It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have actedbefore
this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than that whichyou have placed
before us—no suggestive detail which might help us?”“There is one thing,” said
John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coatpocket, and, drawing out a piece of
discoloured, blue-tinted paper, helaid it out upon the table. “I have some
remembrance,” said he, “thaton the day when my uncle burned the papers I
observed that the small,unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of this
particularcolour. I found this single sheet upon the floor of his room, and I
aminclined to think that it may be one of the papers which has,
perhaps,fluttered out from among the others, and in that way has
escapeddestruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps
usmuch. I think myself that it is a page from some private diary. Thewriting is
undoubtedly my uncle’s.”Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet
of paper, whichshowed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from a
book. Itwas headed, “March, 1869,” and beneath were the following
enigmaticalnotices:“4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.“7th. Set the pips on
McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain of St.Augustine.“9th. McCauley cleared.“10th.
John Swain cleared.“12th. Visited Paramore. All well.”“Thank you!” said Holmes,
folding up the paper and returning it to ourvisitor. “And now you must on no
account lose another instant. Wecannot spare time even to discuss what you have
told me. You must gethome instantly and act.”“What shall I do?”“There is but one
thing to do. It must be done at once. You must putthis piece of paper which you
have shown us into the brass box whichyou have described. You must also put in a
note to say that all theother papers were burned by your uncle, and that this is
the only onewhich remains. You must assert that in such words as will
carryconviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the boxout
upon the sundial, as directed. Do you understand?”“Entirely.”“Do not think of
revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I thinkthat we may gain that by
means of the law; but we have our web toweave, while theirs is already woven.
The first consideration is toremove the pressing danger which threatens you. The
second is to clearup the mystery and to punish the guilty parties.”“I thank
you,” said the young man, rising and pulling on his overcoat.“You have given me
fresh life and hope. I shall certainly do as youadvise.”“Do not lose an instant.
And, above all, take care of yourself in themeanwhile, for I do not think that
there can be a doubt that you arethreatened by a very real and imminent danger.
How do you go back?”“By train from Waterloo.”“It is not yet nine. The streets
will be crowded, so I trust that youmay be in safety. And yet you cannot guard
yourself too closely.”“I am armed.”“That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work
upon your case.”“I shall see you at Horsham, then?”“No, your secret lies in
London. It is there that I shall seek it.”“Then I shall call upon you in a day,
or in two days, with news as tothe box and the papers. I shall take your advice
in every particular.”He shook hands with us and took his leave. Outside the wind
stillscreamed and the rain splashed and pattered against the windows.
Thisstrange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amid the
madelements—blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a gale—and now tohave
been reabsorbed by them once more.Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence,
with his head sunkforward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire. Then
he lithis pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the blue smoke-ringsas
they chased each other up to the ceiling.“I think, Watson,” he remarked at last,
“that of all our cases we havehad none more fantastic than this.”“Save, perhaps,
the Sign of Four.”“Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw
seems to meto be walking amid even greater perils than did the Sholtos.”“But
have you,” I asked, “formed any definite conception as to whatthese perils
are?”“There can be no question as to their nature,” he answered.“Then what are
they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursue thisunhappy family?”Sherlock
Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the arms ofhis chair, with his
finger-tips together. “The ideal reasoner,” heremarked, “would, when he had once
been shown a single fact in all itsbearings, deduce from it not only all the
chain of events which led upto it but also all the results which would follow
from it. As Cuviercould correctly describe a whole animal by the contemplation
of asingle bone, so the observer who has thoroughly understood one link ina
series of incidents should be able to accurately state all the otherones, both
before and after. We have not yet grasped the results whichthe reason alone can
attain to. Problems may be solved in the studywhich have baffled all those who
have sought a solution by the aid oftheir senses. To carry the art, however, to
its highest pitch, it isnecessary that the reasoner should be able to utilise
all the factswhich have come to his knowledge; and this in itself implies, as
youwill readily see, a possession of all knowledge, which, even in thesedays of
free education and encyclopædias, is a somewhat rareaccomplishment. It is not so
impossible, however, that a man shouldpossess all knowledge which is likely to
be useful to him in his work,and this I have endeavoured in my case to do. If I
remember rightly,you on one occasion, in the early days of our friendship,
defined mylimits in a very precise fashion.”“Yes,” I answered, laughing. “It was
a singular document. Philosophy,astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I
remember. Botanyvariable, geology profound as regards the mud-stains from any
regionwithin fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomy
unsystematic,sensational literature and crime records unique, violin-player,
boxer,swordsman, lawyer, and self-poisoner by cocaine and tobacco. Those,
Ithink, were the main points of my analysis.”Holmes grinned at the last item.
“Well,” he said, “I say now, as I saidthen, that a man should keep his little
brain-attic stocked with allthe furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest
he can put away inthe lumber-room of his library, where he can get it if he
wants it.Now, for such a case as the one which has been submitted to usto-night,
we need certainly to muster all our resources. Kindly hand medown the letter K
of the _American Encyclopædia_ which stands upon theshelf beside you. Thank you.
Now let us consider the situation and seewhat may be deduced from it. In the
first place, we may start with astrong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had
some very strong reasonfor leaving America. Men at his time of life do not
change all theirhabits and exchange willingly the charming climate of Florida
for thelonely life of an English provincial town. His extreme love of solitudein
England suggests the idea that he was in fear of someone orsomething, so we may
assume as a working hypothesis that it was fear ofsomeone or something which
drove him from America. As to what it was hefeared, we can only deduce that by
considering the formidable letterswhich were received by himself and his
successors. Did you remark thepostmarks of those letters?”“The first was from
Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the thirdfrom London.”“From East
London. What do you deduce from that?”“They are all seaports. That the writer
was on board of a ship.”“Excellent. We have already a clue. There can be no
doubt that theprobability—the strong probability—is that the writer was on board
of aship. And now let us consider another point. In the case ofPondicherry,
seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its fulfilment,in Dundee it was only
some three or four days. Does that suggestanything?”“A greater distance to
travel.”“But the letter had also a greater distance to come.”“Then I do not see
the point.”“There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the man
ormen are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always send theirsingular
warning or token before them when starting upon their mission.You see how
quickly the deed followed the sign when it came fromDundee. If they had come
from Pondicherry in a steamer they would havearrived almost as soon as their
letter. But, as a matter of fact, sevenweeks elapsed. I think that those seven
weeks represented thedifference between the mail-boat which brought the letter
and thesailing vessel which brought the writer.”“It is possible.”“More than
that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly urgency ofthis new case, and
why I urged young Openshaw to caution. The blow hasalways fallen at the end of
the time which it would take the senders totravel the distance. But this one
comes from London, and therefore wecannot count upon delay.”“Good God!” I cried.
“What can it mean, this relentless persecution?”“The papers which Openshaw
carried are obviously of vital importance tothe person or persons in the
sailing-ship. I think that it is quiteclear that there must be more than one of
them. A single man could nothave carried out two deaths in such a way as to
deceive a coroner’sjury. There must have been several in it, and they must have
been menof resource and determination. Their papers they mean to have, be
theholder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to bethe
initials of an individual and becomes the badge of a society.”“But of what
society?”“Have you never—” said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and sinking
hisvoice—“have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?”“I never have.”Holmes turned
over the leaves of the book upon his knee. “Here it is,”said he presently:“‘Ku
Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to thesound produced by
cocking a rifle. This terrible secret society wasformed by some ex-Confederate
soldiers in the Southern states after theCivil War, and it rapidly formed local
branches in different parts ofthe country, notably in Tennessee, Louisiana, the
Carolinas, Georgia,and Florida. Its power was used for political purposes,
principally forthe terrorising of the negro voters and the murdering and driving
fromthe country of those who were opposed to its views. Its outrages wereusually
preceded by a warning sent to the marked man in some fantasticbut generally
recognised shape—a sprig of oak-leaves in some parts,melon seeds or orange pips
in others. On receiving this the victimmight either openly abjure his former
ways, or might fly from thecountry. If he braved the matter out, death would
unfailingly come uponhim, and usually in some strange and unforeseen manner. So
perfect wasthe organisation of the society, and so systematic its methods,
thatthere is hardly a case upon record where any man succeeded in bravingit with
impunity, or in which any of its outrages were traced home tothe perpetrators.
For some years the organisation flourished in spiteof the efforts of the United
States government and of the betterclasses of the community in the South.
Eventually, in the year 1869,the movement rather suddenly collapsed, although
there have beensporadic outbreaks of the same sort since that date.’“You will
observe,” said Holmes, laying down the volume, “that thesudden breaking up of
the society was coincident with the disappearanceof Openshaw from America with
their papers. It may well have been causeand effect. It is no wonder that he and
his family have some of themore implacable spirits upon their track. You can
understand that thisregister and diary may implicate some of the first men in
the South,and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it
isrecovered.”“Then the page we have seen—”“Is such as we might expect. It ran,
if I remember right, ‘sent thepips to A, B, and C’—that is, sent the society’s
warning to them. Thenthere are successive entries that A and B cleared, or left
the country,and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a sinister result for
C.Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let some light into this dark place,and I
believe that the only chance young Openshaw has in the meantimeis to do what I
have told him. There is nothing more to be said or tobe done to-night, so hand
me over my violin and let us try to forgetfor half an hour the miserable weather
and the still more miserableways of our fellow men.”It had cleared in the
morning, and the sun was shining with a subduedbrightness through the dim veil
which hangs over the great city.Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I
came down.“You will excuse me for not waiting for you,” said he; “I have,
Iforesee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of
youngOpenshaw’s.”“What steps will you take?” I asked.“It will very much depend
upon the results of my first inquiries. I mayhave to go down to Horsham, after
all.”“You will not go there first?”“No, I shall commence with the City. Just
ring the bell and the maidwill bring up your coffee.”As I waited, I lifted the
unopened newspaper from the table and glancedmy eye over it. It rested upon a
heading which sent a chill to myheart.“Holmes,” I cried, “you are too
late.”“Ah!” said he, laying down his cup, “I feared as much. How was itdone?” He
spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.“My eye caught the name
of Openshaw, and the heading ‘Tragedy NearWaterloo Bridge.’ Here is the
account:“‘Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the
HDivision, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and asplash in the
water. The night, however, was extremely dark and stormy,so that, in spite of
the help of several passers-by, it was quiteimpossible to effect a rescue. The
alarm, however, was given, and, bythe aid of the water-police, the body was
eventually recovered. Itproved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it
appears froman envelope which was found in his pocket, was John Openshaw, and
whoseresidence is near Horsham. It is conjectured that he may have beenhurrying
down to catch the last train from Waterloo Station, and thatin his haste and the
extreme darkness he missed his path and walkedover the edge of one of the small
landing-places for river steamboats.The body exhibited no traces of violence,
and there can be no doubtthat the deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate
accident, whichshould have the effect of calling the attention of the
authorities tothe condition of the riverside landing-stages.’”We sat in silence
for some minutes, Holmes more depressed and shakenthan I had ever seen him.“That
hurts my pride, Watson,” he said at last. “It is a petty feeling,no doubt, but
it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal matter with menow, and, if God sends me
health, I shall set my hand upon this gang.That he should come to me for help,
and that I should send him away tohis death—!” He sprang from his chair and
paced about the room inuncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon his sallow
cheeks and anervous clasping and unclasping of his long thin hands.“They must be
cunning devils,” he exclaimed at last. “How could theyhave decoyed him down
there? The Embankment is not on the direct lineto the station. The bridge, no
doubt, was too crowded, even on such anight, for their purpose. Well, Watson, we
shall see who will win inthe long run. I am going out now!”“To the police?”“No;
I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may takethe flies, but
not before.”All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in
theevening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had not comeback
yet. It was nearly ten o’clock before he entered, looking pale andworn. He
walked up to the sideboard, and tearing a piece from the loafhe devoured it
voraciously, washing it down with a long draught ofwater.“You are hungry,” I
remarked.“Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing
sincebreakfast.”“Nothing?”“Not a bite. I had no time to think of it.”“And how
have you succeeded?”“Well.”“You have a clue?”“I have them in the hollow of my
hand. Young Openshaw shall not longremain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put
their own devilish trade-markupon them. It is well thought of!”“What do you
mean?”He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces hesqueezed
out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five and thrustthem into an
envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote “S. H. for J.O.” Then he sealed it
and addressed it to “Captain James Calhoun,Barque _Lone Star_, Savannah,
Georgia.”“That will await him when he enters port,” said he, chuckling. “It
maygive him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursor of hisfate as
Openshaw did before him.”“And who is this Captain Calhoun?”“The leader of the
gang. I shall have the others, but he first.”“How did you trace it, then?”He
took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered with datesand names.“I
have spent the whole day,” said he, “over Lloyd’s registers andfiles of the old
papers, following the future career of every vesselwhich touched at Pondicherry
in January and February in ’83. There werethirty-six ships of fair tonnage which
were reported there during thosemonths. Of these, one, the _Lone Star_,
instantly attracted myattention, since, although it was reported as having
cleared fromLondon, the name is that which is given to one of the states of
theUnion.”“Texas, I think.”“I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the
ship must have anAmerican origin.”“What then?”“I searched the Dundee records,
and when I found that the barque _LoneStar_ was there in January, ’85, my
suspicion became a certainty. Ithen inquired as to the vessels which lay at
present in the port ofLondon.”“Yes?”“The _Lone Star_ had arrived here last week.
I went down to the AlbertDock and found that she had been taken down the river
by the early tidethis morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired to Gravesend
andlearned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is easterlyI have
no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and not very far fromthe Isle of
Wight.”“What will you do, then?”“Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two
mates, are as I learn, theonly native-born Americans in the ship. The others are
Finns andGermans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship
lastnight. I had it from the stevedore who has been loading their cargo. Bythe
time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah the mail-boat willhave carried
this letter, and the cable will have informed the policeof Savannah that these
three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon acharge of murder.”There is ever a
flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans, and themurderers of John
Openshaw were never to receive the orange pips whichwould show them that
another, as cunning and as resolute as themselves,was upon their track. Very
long and very severe were the equinoctialgales that year. We waited long for
news of the _Lone Star_ ofSavannah, but none ever reached us. We did at last
hear that somewherefar out in the Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boat was
seenswinging in the trough of a wave, with the letters “L. S.” carved uponit,
and that is all which we shall ever know of the fate of the _LoneStar_.VI. THE
MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIPIsa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D.,
Principal of theTheological College of St. George’s, was much addicted to opium.
Thehabit grew upon him, as I understand, from some foolish freak when hewas at
college; for having read De Quincey’s description of his dreamsand sensations,
he had drenched his tobacco with laudanum in an attemptto produce the same
effects. He found, as so many more have done, thatthe practice is easier to
attain than to get rid of, and for many yearshe continued to be a slave to the
drug, an object of mingled horror andpity to his friends and relatives. I can
see him now, with yellow,pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point pupils, all
huddled in achair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man.One night—it was in June,
’89—there came a ring to my bell, about thehour when a man gives his first yawn
and glances at the clock. I sat upin my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work
down in her lap and madea little face of disappointment.“A patient!” said she.
“You’ll have to go out.”I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.We
heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps uponthe linoleum.
Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in somedark-coloured stuff, with a
black veil, entered the room.“You will excuse my calling so late,” she began,
and then, suddenlylosing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about
mywife’s neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. “Oh, I’m in such trouble!”she
cried; “I do so want a little help.”“Why,” said my wife, pulling up her veil,
“it is Kate Whitney. How youstartled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were
when you came in.”“I didn’t know what to do, so I came straight to you.” That
was alwaysthe way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds to
alighthouse.“It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine
andwater, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it. Or should yourather
that I sent James off to bed?”“Oh, no, no! I want the doctor’s advice and help,
too. It’s about Isa.He has not been home for two days. I am so frightened about
him!”It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her
husband’strouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend and
schoolcompanion. We soothed and comforted her by such words as we could find.Did
she know where her husband was? Was it possible that we could bringhim back to
her?It seems that it was. She had the surest information that of late hehad,
when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the farthesteast of the
City. Hitherto his orgies had always been confined to oneday, and he had come
back, twitching and shattered, in the evening. Butnow the spell had been upon
him eight-and-forty hours, and he laythere, doubtless among the dregs of the
docks, breathing in the poisonor sleeping off the effects. There he was to be
found, she was sure ofit, at the Bar of Gold, in Upper Swandam Lane. But what
was she to do?How could she, a young and timid woman, make her way into such a
placeand pluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surrounded him?There
was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it.Might I not escort
her to this place? And then, as a second thought,why should she come at all? I
was Isa Whitney’s medical adviser, and assuch I had influence over him. I could
manage it better if I werealone. I promised her on my word that I would send him
home in a cabwithin two hours if he were indeed at the address which she had
givenme. And so in ten minutes I had left my armchair and cheerysitting-room
behind me, and was speeding eastward in a hansom on astrange errand, as it
seemed to me at the time, though the future onlycould show how strange it was to
be.But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my adventure.Upper
Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind the high wharveswhich line the north
side of the river to the east of London Bridge.Between a slop-shop and a
gin-shop, approached by a steep flight ofsteps leading down to a black gap like
the mouth of a cave, I found theden of which I was in search. Ordering my cab to
wait, I passed downthe steps, worn hollow in the centre by the ceaseless tread
of drunkenfeet; and by the light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I
foundthe latch and made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavy withthe
brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden berths, like theforecastle of an
emigrant ship.Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying
instrange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads thrownback, and
chins pointing upward, with here and there a dark,lack-lustre eye turned upon
the newcomer. Out of the black shadowsthere glimmered little red circles of
light, now bright, now faint, asthe burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls
of the metal pipes. Themost lay silent, but some muttered to themselves, and
others talkedtogether in a strange, low, monotonous voice, their conversation
comingin gushes, and then suddenly tailing off into silence, each mumblingout
his own thoughts and paying little heed to the words of hisneighbour. At the
farther end was a small brazier of burning charcoal,beside which on a
three-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin oldman, with his jaw resting
upon his two fists, and his elbows upon hisknees, staring into the fire.As I
entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe forme and a supply
of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.“Thank you. I have not come to
stay,” said I. “There is a friend ofmine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to
speak with him.”There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and
peeringthrough the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and unkempt, staringout
at me.“My God! It’s Watson,” said he. He was in a pitiable state of
reaction,with every nerve in a twitter. “I say, Watson, what o’clock is
it?”“Nearly eleven.”“Of what day?”“Of Friday, June 19th.”“Good heavens! I
thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What d’youwant to frighten a chap
for?” He sank his face onto his arms and beganto sob in a high treble key.“I
tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting this twodays for
you. You should be ashamed of yourself!”“So I am. But you’ve got mixed, Watson,
for I have only been here a fewhours, three pipes, four pipes—I forget how many.
But I’ll go home withyou. I wouldn’t frighten Kate—poor little Kate. Give me
your hand! Haveyou a cab?”“Yes, I have one waiting.”“Then I shall go in it. But
I must owe something. Find what I owe,Watson. I am all off colour. I can do
nothing for myself.”I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of
sleepers,holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the
drug,and looking about for the manager. As I passed the tall man who sat bythe
brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voicewhispered, “Walk past
me, and then look back at me.” The words fellquite distinctly upon my ear. I
glanced down. They could only have comefrom the old man at my side, and yet he
sat now as absorbed as ever,very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium
pipe dangling downfrom between his knees, as though it had dropped in sheer
lassitudefrom his fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back. It took
allmy self-control to prevent me from breaking out into a cry ofastonishment. He
had turned his back so that none could see him but I.His form had filled out,
his wrinkles were gone, the dull eyes hadregained their fire, and there, sitting
by the fire and grinning at mysurprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He
made a slight motionto me to approach him, and instantly, as he turned his face
half roundto the company once more, subsided into a doddering,
loose-lippedsenility.“Holmes!” I whispered, “what on earth are you doing in this
den?”“As low as you can,” he answered; “I have excellent ears. If you wouldhave
the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend of yours Ishould be
exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you.”“I have a cab outside.”“Then
pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for heappears to be too limp
to get into any mischief. I should recommend youalso to send a note by the
cabman to your wife to say that you havethrown in your lot with me. If you will
wait outside, I shall be withyou in five minutes.”It was difficult to refuse any
of Sherlock Holmes’ requests, for theywere always so exceedingly definite, and
put forward with such a quietair of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney
was once confined inthe cab my mission was practically accomplished; and for the
rest, Icould not wish anything better than to be associated with my friend inone
of those singular adventures which were the normal condition of hisexistence. In
a few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitney’s bill,led him out to the cab,
and seen him driven through the darkness. In avery short time a decrepit figure
had emerged from the opium den, and Iwas walking down the street with Sherlock
Holmes. For two streets heshuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot.
Then, glancingquickly round, he straightened himself out and burst into a hearty
fitof laughter.“I suppose, Watson,” said he, “that you imagine that I have
addedopium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other littleweaknesses on
which you have favoured me with your medical views.”“I was certainly surprised
to find you there.”“But not more so than I to find you.”“I came to find a
friend.”“And I to find an enemy.”“An enemy?”“Yes; one of my natural enemies, or,
shall I say, my natural prey.Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very
remarkable inquiry, and Ihave hoped to find a clue in the incoherent ramblings
of these sots, asI have done before now. Had I been recognised in that den my
life wouldnot have been worth an hour’s purchase; for I have used it before
nowfor my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn tohave
vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at the back of thatbuilding, near the
corner of Paul’s Wharf, which could tell somestrange tales of what has passed
through it upon the moonless nights.”“What! You do not mean bodies?”“Ay, bodies,
Watson. We should be rich men if we had £ 1000 for everypoor devil who has been
done to death in that den. It is the vilestmurder-trap on the whole riverside,
and I fear that Neville St. Clairhas entered it never to leave it more. But our
trap should be here.” Heput his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled
shrilly—a signalwhich was answered by a similar whistle from the distance,
followedshortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses’ hoofs.“Now,
Watson,” said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through thegloom, throwing
out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its sidelanterns. “You’ll come with
me, won’t you?”“If I can be of use.”“Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and
a chronicler still more so.My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one.”“The
Cedars?”“Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair’s house. I am staying there while I
conductthe inquiry.”“Where is it, then?”“Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile
drive before us.”“But I am all in the dark.”“Of course you are. You’ll know all
about it presently. Jump up here.All right, John; we shall not need you. Here’s
half a crown. Look outfor me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her head. So
long, then!”He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through
theendless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which widenedgradually,
until we were flying across a broad balustraded bridge, withthe murky river
flowing sluggishly beneath us. Beyond lay another dullwilderness of bricks and
mortar, its silence broken only by the heavy,regular footfall of the policeman,
or the songs and shouts of somebelated party of revellers. A dull wrack was
drifting slowly across thesky, and a star or two twinkled dimly here and there
through the riftsof the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon
hisbreast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I sat besidehim,
curious to learn what this new quest might be which seemed to taxhis powers so
sorely, and yet afraid to break in upon the current ofhis thoughts. We had
driven several miles, and were beginning to get tothe fringe of the belt of
suburban villas, when he shook himself,shrugged his shoulders, and lit up his
pipe with the air of a man whohas satisfied himself that he is acting for the
best.“You have a grand gift of silence, Watson,” said he. “It makes youquite
invaluable as a companion. ’Pon my word, it is a great thing forme to have
someone to talk to, for my own thoughts are notover-pleasant. I was wondering
what I should say to this dear littlewoman to-night when she meets me at the
door.”“You forget that I know nothing about it.”“I shall just have time to tell
you the facts of the case before we getto Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and
yet, somehow I can get nothing togo upon. There’s plenty of thread, no doubt,
but I can’t get the end ofit into my hand. Now, I’ll state the case clearly and
concisely to you,Watson, and maybe you can see a spark where all is dark to
me.”“Proceed, then.”“Some years ago—to be definite, in May, 1884—there came to
Lee agentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to have plenty ofmoney.
He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely, andlived generally in
good style. By degrees he made friends in theneighbourhood, and in 1887 he
married the daughter of a local brewer,by whom he now has two children. He had
no occupation, but wasinterested in several companies and went into town as a
rule in themorning, returning by the 5:14 from Cannon Street every night. Mr.
St.Clair is now thirty-seven years of age, is a man of temperate habits, agood
husband, a very affectionate father, and a man who is popular withall who know
him. I may add that his whole debts at the present moment,as far as we have been
able to ascertain, amount to £ 88 10_s_., whilehe has £ 220 standing to his
credit in the Capital and Counties Bank.There is no reason, therefore, to think
that money troubles have beenweighing upon his mind.“Last Monday Mr. Neville St.
Clair went into town rather earlier thanusual, remarking before he started that
he had two importantcommissions to perform, and that he would bring his little
boy home abox of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife received a
telegramupon this same Monday, very shortly after his departure, to the
effectthat a small parcel of considerable value which she had been expectingwas
waiting for her at the offices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company.Now, if you are
well up in your London, you will know that the officeof the company is in Fresno
Street, which branches out of Upper SwandamLane, where you found me to-night.
Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch,started for the City, did some shopping, proceeded
to the company’soffice, got her packet, and found herself at exactly 4:35
walkingthrough Swandam Lane on her way back to the station. Have you followedme
so far?”“It is very clear.”“If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day,
and Mrs. St. Clairwalked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab, as
she didnot like the neighbourhood in which she found herself. While she
waswalking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenly heard anejaculation or
cry, and was struck cold to see her husband looking downat her and, as it seemed
to her, beckoning to her from a second-floorwindow. The window was open, and she
distinctly saw his face, which shedescribes as being terribly agitated. He waved
his hands frantically toher, and then vanished from the window so suddenly that
it seemed toher that he had been plucked back by some irresistible force
frombehind. One singular point which struck her quick feminine eye was
thatalthough he wore some dark coat, such as he had started to town in, hehad on
neither collar nor necktie.“Convinced that something was amiss with him, she
rushed down thesteps—for the house was none other than the opium den in which
youfound me to-night—and running through the front room she attempted toascend
the stairs which led to the first floor. At the foot of thestairs, however, she
met this Lascar scoundrel of whom I have spoken,who thrust her back and, aided
by a Dane, who acts as assistant there,pushed her out into the street. Filled
with the most maddening doubtsand fears, she rushed down the lane and, by rare
good-fortune, met inFresno Street a number of constables with an inspector, all
on theirway to their beat. The inspector and two men accompanied her back, andin
spite of the continued resistance of the proprietor, they made theirway to the
room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen. There was nosign of him there.
In fact, in the whole of that floor there was no oneto be found save a crippled
wretch of hideous aspect, who, it seems,made his home there. Both he and the
Lascar stoutly swore that no oneelse had been in the front room during the
afternoon. So determined wastheir denial that the inspector was staggered, and
had almost come tobelieve that Mrs. St. Clair had been deluded when, with a cry,
shesprang at a small deal box which lay upon the table and tore the lidfrom it.
Out there fell a cascade of children’s bricks. It was the toywhich he had
promised to bring home.“This discovery, and the evident confusion which the
cripple showed,made the inspector realise that the matter was serious. The rooms
werecarefully examined, and results all pointed to an abominable crime. Thefront
room was plainly furnished as a sitting-room and led into a smallbedroom, which
looked out upon the back of one of the wharves. Betweenthe wharf and the bedroom
window is a narrow strip, which is dry at lowtide but is covered at high tide
with at least four and a half feet ofwater. The bedroom window was a broad one
and opened from below. Onexamination traces of blood were to be seen upon the
windowsill, andseveral scattered drops were visible upon the wooden floor of
thebedroom. Thrust away behind a curtain in the front room were all theclothes
of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the exception of his coat. Hisboots, his socks,
his hat, and his watch—all were there. There were nosigns of violence upon any
of these garments, and there were no othertraces of Mr. Neville St. Clair. Out
of the window he must apparentlyhave gone for no other exit could be discovered,
and the ominousbloodstains upon the sill gave little promise that he could
savehimself by swimming, for the tide was at its very highest at the momentof
the tragedy.“And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicated
inthe matter. The Lascar was known to be a man of the vilest antecedents,but as,
by Mrs. St. Clair’s story, he was known to have been at thefoot of the stair
within a very few seconds of her husband’s appearanceat the window, he could
hardly have been more than an accessory to thecrime. His defence was one of
absolute ignorance, and he protested thathe had no knowledge as to the doings of
Hugh Boone, his lodger, andthat he could not account in any way for the presence
of the missinggentleman’s clothes.“So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the
sinister cripple who livesupon the second floor of the opium den, and who was
certainly the lasthuman being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. His name
is HughBoone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar to every man whogoes
much to the City. He is a professional beggar, though in order toavoid the
police regulations he pretends to a small trade in waxvestas. Some little
distance down Threadneedle Street, upon theleft-hand side, there is, as you may
have remarked, a small angle inthe wall. Here it is that this creature takes his
daily seat,cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as he is
apiteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends into the greasyleather cap
which lies upon the pavement beside him. I have watched thefellow more than once
before ever I thought of making his professionalacquaintance, and I have been
surprised at the harvest which he hasreaped in a short time. His appearance, you
see, is so remarkable thatno one can pass him without observing him. A shock of
orange hair, apale face disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its
contraction, hasturned up the outer edge of his upper lip, a bulldog chin, and a
pairof very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singular contrast to
thecolour of his hair, all mark him out from amid the common crowd ofmendicants
and so, too, does his wit, for he is ever ready with a replyto any piece of
chaff which may be thrown at him by the passers-by.This is the man whom we now
learn to have been the lodger at the opiumden, and to have been the last man to
see the gentleman of whom we arein quest.”“But a cripple!” said I. “What could
he have done single-handed againsta man in the prime of life?”“He is a cripple
in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in otherrespects he appears to be a
powerful and well-nurtured man. Surely yourmedical experience would tell you,
Watson, that weakness in one limb isoften compensated for by exceptional
strength in the others.”“Pray continue your narrative.”“Mrs. St. Clair had
fainted at the sight of the blood upon the window,and she was escorted home in a
cab by the police, as her presence couldbe of no help to them in their
investigations. Inspector Barton, whohad charge of the case, made a very careful
examination of thepremises, but without finding anything which threw any light
upon thematter. One mistake had been made in not arresting Boone instantly, ashe
was allowed some few minutes during which he might have communicatedwith his
friend the Lascar, but this fault was soon remedied, and hewas seized and
searched, without anything being found which couldincriminate him. There were,
it is true, some blood-stains upon hisright shirt-sleeve, but he pointed to his
ring-finger, which had beencut near the nail, and explained that the bleeding
came from there,adding that he had been to the window not long before, and that
thestains which had been observed there came doubtless from the samesource. He
denied strenuously having ever seen Mr. Neville St. Clairand swore that the
presence of the clothes in his room was as much amystery to him as to the
police. As to Mrs. St. Clair’s assertion thatshe had actually seen her husband
at the window, he declared that shemust have been either mad or dreaming. He was
removed, loudlyprotesting, to the police-station, while the inspector remained
uponthe premises in the hope that the ebbing tide might afford some
freshclue.“And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they
hadfeared to find. It was Neville St. Clair’s coat, and not Neville St.Clair,
which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And what do you thinkthey found in the
pockets?”“I cannot imagine.”“No, I don’t think you would guess. Every pocket
stuffed with penniesand half-pennies—421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It was no
wonderthat it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is
adifferent matter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and thehouse. It
seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remained whenthe stripped body
had been sucked away into the river.”“But I understand that all the other
clothes were found in the room.Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?”“No,
sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose thatthis man Boone
had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, thereis no human eye which
could have seen the deed. What would he do then?It would of course instantly
strike him that he must get rid of thetell-tale garments. He would seize the
coat, then, and be in the act ofthrowing it out, when it would occur to him that
it would swim and notsink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle
downstairs whenthe wife tried to force her way up, and perhaps he has already
heardfrom his Lascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the
street.There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret hoard,where
he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary, and he stuffs allthe coins upon
which he can lay his hands into the pockets to make sureof the coat’s sinking.
He throws it out, and would have done the samewith the other garments had not he
heard the rush of steps below, andonly just had time to close the window when
the police appeared.”“It certainly sounds feasible.”“Well, we will take it as a
working hypothesis for want of a better.Boone, as I have told you, was arrested
and taken to the station, butit could not be shown that there had ever before
been anything againsthim. He had for years been known as a professional beggar,
but his lifeappeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one. There the
matterstands at present, and the questions which have to be solved—whatNeville
St. Clair was doing in the opium den, what happened to him whenthere, where is
he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with hisdisappearance—are all as far from
a solution as ever. I confess that Icannot recall any case within my experience
which looked at the firstglance so simple and yet which presented such
difficulties.”While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series
ofevents, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the great townuntil the
last straggling houses had been left behind, and we rattledalong with a country
hedge upon either side of us. Just as he finished,however, we drove through two
scattered villages, where a few lightsstill glimmered in the windows.“We are on
the outskirts of Lee,” said my companion. “We have touchedon three English
counties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex,passing over an angle of
Surrey, and ending in Kent. See that lightamong the trees? That is The Cedars,
and beside that lamp sits a womanwhose anxious ears have already, I have little
doubt, caught the clinkof our horse’s feet.”“But why are you not conducting the
case from Baker Street?” I asked.“Because there are many inquiries which must be
made out here. Mrs. St.Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and
you may restassured that she will have nothing but a welcome for my friend
andcolleague. I hate to meet her, Watson, when I have no news of herhusband.
Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!”We had pulled up in front of a large villa which
stood within its owngrounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse’s head, and
springingdown, I followed Holmes up the small, winding gravel-drive which led
tothe house. As we approached, the door flew open, and a little blondewoman
stood in the opening, clad in some sort of light mousseline desoie, with a touch
of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck and wrists. Shestood with her figure outlined
against the flood of light, one handupon the door, one half-raised in her
eagerness, her body slightlybent, her head and face protruded, with eager eyes
and parted lips, astanding question.“Well?” she cried, “well?” And then, seeing
that there were two of us,she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she
saw that mycompanion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.“No good
news?”“None.”“No bad?”“No.”“Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary,
for you have had along day.”“This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most
vital use to me inseveral of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible
for me tobring him out and associate him with this investigation.”“I am
delighted to see you,” said she, pressing my hand warmly. “Youwill, I am sure,
forgive anything that may be wanting in ourarrangements, when you consider the
blow which has come so suddenlyupon us.”“My dear madam,” said I, “I am an old
campaigner, and if I were not Ican very well see that no apology is needed. If I
can be of anyassistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be
indeedhappy.”“Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said the lady as we entered a
well-litdining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had been laid out,“I
should very much like to ask you one or two plain questions, towhich I beg that
you will give a plain answer.”“Certainly, madam.”“Do not trouble about my
feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given tofainting. I simply wish to hear your
real, real opinion.”“Upon what point?”“In your heart of hearts, do you think
that Neville is alive?”Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question.
“Frankly,now!” she repeated, standing upon the rug and looking keenly down athim
as he leaned back in a basket-chair.“Frankly, then, madam, I do not.”“You think
that he is dead?”“I do.”“Murdered?”“I don’t say that. Perhaps.”“And on what day
did he meet his death?”“On Monday.”“Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good
enough to explain how it isthat I have received a letter from him
to-day.”Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been
galvanised.“What!” he roared.“Yes, to-day.” She stood smiling, holding up a
little slip of paper inthe air.“May I see it?”“Certainly.”He snatched it from
her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out upon thetable he drew over the lamp
and examined it intently. I had left mychair and was gazing at it over his
shoulder. The envelope was a verycoarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend
postmark and with thedate of that very day, or rather of the day before, for it
wasconsiderably after midnight.“Coarse writing,” murmured Holmes. “Surely this
is not your husband’swriting, madam.”“No, but the enclosure is.”“I perceive also
that whoever addressed the envelope had to go andinquire as to the address.”“How
can you tell that?”“The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has
dried itself.The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that blotting-paper
hasbeen used. If it had been written straight off, and then blotted, nonewould
be of a deep black shade. This man has written the name, andthere has then been
a pause before he wrote the address, which can onlymean that he was not familiar
with it. It is, of course, a trifle, butthere is nothing so important as
trifles. Let us now see the letter.Ha! there has been an enclosure here!”“Yes,
there was a ring. His signet-ring.”“And you are sure that this is your husband’s
hand?”“One of his hands.”“One?”“His hand when he wrote hurriedly. It is very
unlike his usual writing,and yet I know it well.”“‘Dearest do not be frightened.
All will come well. There is a hugeerror which it may take some little time to
rectify. Wait inpatience.—NEVILLE.’ Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a
book,octavo size, no water-mark. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a manwith a
dirty thumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not verymuch in error, by
a person who had been chewing tobacco. And you haveno doubt that it is your
husband’s hand, madam?”“None. Neville wrote those words.”“And they were posted
to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, theclouds lighten, though I should
not venture to say that the danger isover.”“But he must be alive, Mr.
Holmes.”“Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent. Thering,
after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him.”“No, no; it is, it
is his very own writing!”“Very well. It may, however, have been written on
Monday and onlyposted to-day.”“That is possible.”“If so, much may have happened
between.”“Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is
wellwith him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I should know ifevil
came upon him. On the very day that I saw him last he cut himselfin the bedroom,
and yet I in the dining-room rushed upstairs instantlywith the utmost certainty
that something had happened. Do you thinkthat I would respond to such a trifle
and yet be ignorant of hisdeath?”“I have seen too much not to know that the
impression of a woman may bemore valuable than the conclusion of an analytical
reasoner. And inthis letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence
tocorroborate your view. But if your husband is alive and able to writeletters,
why should he remain away from you?”“I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable.”“And
on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?”“No.”“And you were surprised to
see him in Swandam Lane?”“Very much so.”“Was the window open?”“Yes.”“Then he
might have called to you?”“He might.”“He only, as I understand, gave an
inarticulate cry?”“Yes.”“A call for help, you thought?”“Yes. He waved his
hands.”“But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at theunexpected
sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?”“It is possible.”“And you
thought he was pulled back?”“He disappeared so suddenly.”“He might have leaped
back. You did not see anyone else in the room?”“No, but this horrible man
confessed to having been there, and theLascar was at the foot of the
stairs.”“Quite so. Your husband, as far as you could see, had his
ordinaryclothes on?”“But without his collar or tie. I distinctly saw his bare
throat.”“Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?”“Never.”“Had he ever showed any
signs of having taken opium?”“Never.”“Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the
principal points about whichI wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a
little supper andthen retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow.”A large
and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at ourdisposal, and I was
quickly between the sheets, for I was weary aftermy night of adventure. Sherlock
Holmes was a man, however, who, when hehad an unsolved problem upon his mind,
would go for days, and even fora week, without rest, turning it over,
rearranging his facts, lookingat it from every point of view until he had either
fathomed it orconvinced himself that his data were insufficient. It was soon
evidentto me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting. He took offhis
coat and waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown, and thenwandered about
the room collecting pillows from his bed and cushionsfrom the sofa and
armchairs. With these he constructed a sort ofEastern divan, upon which he
perched himself cross-legged, with anounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches
laid out in front of him. Inthe dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there,
an old briar pipebetween his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the corner of
theceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him, silent, motionless, withthe
light shining upon his strong-set aquiline features. So he sat as Idropped off
to sleep, and so he sat when a sudden ejaculation caused meto wake up, and I
found the summer sun shining into the apartment. Thepipe was still between his
lips, the smoke still curled upward, and theroom was full of a dense tobacco
haze, but nothing remained of the heapof shag which I had seen upon the previous
night.“Awake, Watson?” he asked.“Yes.”“Game for a morning
drive?”“Certainly.”“Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the
stable-boysleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out.” He chuckled to himself
ashe spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to thesombre
thinker of the previous night.As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no
wonder that no one wasstirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had
hardly finishedwhen Holmes returned with the news that the boy was putting in
thehorse.“I want to test a little theory of mine,” said he, pulling on hisboots.
“I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence ofone of the most
absolute fools in Europe. I deserve to be kicked fromhere to Charing Cross. But
I think I have the key of the affair now.”“And where is it?” I asked,
smiling.“In the bathroom,” he answered. “Oh, yes, I am not joking,” hecontinued,
seeing my look of incredulity. “I have just been there, andI have taken it out,
and I have got it in this Gladstone bag. Come on,my boy, and we shall see
whether it will not fit the lock.”We made our way downstairs as quietly as
possible, and out into thebright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse
and trap, with thehalf-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both sprang in,
and awaywe dashed down the London Road. A few country carts were
stirring,bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but the lines of villas
oneither side were as silent and lifeless as some city in a dream.“It has been
in some points a singular case,” said Holmes, flicking thehorse on into a
gallop. “I confess that I have been as blind as a mole,but it is better to learn
wisdom late than never to learn it at all.”In town the earliest risers were just
beginning to look sleepily fromtheir windows as we drove through the streets of
the Surrey side.Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the river,
anddashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the right and foundourselves
in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well known to the force,and the two
constables at the door saluted him. One of them held thehorse’s head while the
other led us in.“Who is on duty?” asked Holmes.“Inspector Bradstreet, sir.”“Ah,
Bradstreet, how are you?” A tall, stout official had come down thestone-flagged
passage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket. “I wish tohave a quiet word with
you, Bradstreet.”“Certainly, Mr. Holmes. Step into my room here.”It was a small,
office-like room, with a huge ledger upon the table,and a telephone projecting
from the wall. The inspector sat down at hisdesk.“What can I do for you, Mr.
Holmes?”“I called about that beggarman, Boone—the one who was charged withbeing
concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee.”“Yes. He was
brought up and remanded for further inquiries.”“So I heard. You have him
here?”“In the cells.”“Is he quiet?”“Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty
scoundrel.”“Dirty?”“Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his
face isas black as a tinker’s. Well, when once his case has been settled, hewill
have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you wouldagree with me
that he needed it.”“I should like to see him very much.”“Would you? That is
easily done. Come this way. You can leave yourbag.”“No, I think that I’ll take
it.”“Very good. Come this way, if you please.” He led us down a passage,opened a
barred door, passed down a winding stair, and brought us to awhitewashed
corridor with a line of doors on each side.“The third on the right is his,” said
the inspector. “Here it is!” Hequietly shot back a panel in the upper part of
the door and glancedthrough.“He is asleep,” said he. “You can see him very
well.”We both put our eyes to the grating. The prisoner lay with his facetowards
us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and heavily. He wasa middle-sized
man, coarsely clad as became his calling, with acoloured shirt protruding
through the rent in his tattered coat. Hewas, as the inspector had said,
extremely dirty, but the grime whichcovered his face could not conceal its
repulsive ugliness. A broadwheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye
to chin, and by itscontraction had turned up one side of the upper lip, so that
threeteeth were exposed in a perpetual snarl. A shock of very bright redhair
grew low over his eyes and forehead.“He’s a beauty, isn’t he?” said the
inspector.“He certainly needs a wash,” remarked Holmes. “I had an idea that
hemight, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me.” He openedthe
Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my astonishment, a verylarge
bath-sponge.“He! he! You are a funny one,” chuckled the inspector.“Now, if you
will have the great goodness to open that door veryquietly, we will soon make
him cut a much more respectable figure.”“Well, I don’t know why not,” said the
inspector. “He doesn’t look acredit to the Bow Street cells, does he?” He
slipped his key into thelock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The
sleeper halfturned, and then settled down once more into a deep slumber.
Holmesstooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge, and then rubbed ittwice
vigorously across and down the prisoner’s face.“Let me introduce you,” he
shouted, “to Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee,in the county of Kent.”Never in my
life have I seen such a sight. The man’s face peeled offunder the sponge like
the bark from a tree. Gone was the coarse browntint! Gone, too, was the horrid
scar which had seamed it across, andthe twisted lip which had given the
repulsive sneer to the face! Atwitch brought away the tangled red hair, and
there, sitting up in hisbed, was a pale, sad-faced, refined-looking man,
black-haired andsmooth-skinned, rubbing his eyes and staring about him with
sleepybewilderment. Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into ascream
and threw himself down with his face to the pillow.“Great heavens!” cried the
inspector, “it is, indeed, the missing man.I know him from the photograph.”The
prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandons himselfto his
destiny. “Be it so,” said he. “And pray what am I charged with?”“With making
away with Mr. Neville St.— Oh, come, you can’t be chargedwith that unless they
make a case of attempted suicide of it,” said theinspector with a grin. “Well, I
have been twenty-seven years in theforce, but this really takes the cake.”“If I
am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious that no crime hasbeen committed,
and that, therefore, I am illegally detained.”“No crime, but a very great error
has been committed,” said Holmes.“You would have done better to have trusted
your wife.”“It was not the wife; it was the children,” groaned the prisoner.
“Godhelp me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My God! What
anexposure! What can I do?”Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and
patted him kindlyon the shoulder.“If you leave it to a court of law to clear the
matter up,” said he,“of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other
hand, if youconvince the police authorities that there is no possible case
againstyou, I do not know that there is any reason that the details shouldfind
their way into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, I am sure,make notes upon
anything which you might tell us and submit it to theproper authorities. The
case would then never go into court at all.”“God bless you!” cried the prisoner
passionately. “I would have enduredimprisonment, ay, even execution, rather than
have left my miserablesecret as a family blot to my children.“You are the first
who have ever heard my story. My father was aschoolmaster in Chesterfield, where
I received an excellent education.I travelled in my youth, took to the stage,
and finally became areporter on an evening paper in London. One day my editor
wished tohave a series of articles upon begging in the metropolis, and
Ivolunteered to supply them. There was the point from which all myadventures
started. It was only by trying begging as an amateur that Icould get the facts
upon which to base my articles. When an actor Ihad, of course, learned all the
secrets of making up, and had beenfamous in the green-room for my skill. I took
advantage now of myattainments. I painted my face, and to make myself as
pitiable aspossible I made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip in a twist
bythe aid of a small slip of flesh-coloured plaster. Then with a red headof
hair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in the businesspart of the
city, ostensibly as a match-seller but really as a beggar.For seven hours I
plied my trade, and when I returned home in theevening I found to my surprise
that I had received no less than 26_s_.4_d_.“I wrote my articles and thought
little more of the matter until, sometime later, I backed a bill for a friend
and had a writ served upon mefor £ 25. I was at my wit’s end where to get the
money, but a suddenidea came to me. I begged a fortnight’s grace from the
creditor, askedfor a holiday from my employers, and spent the time in begging in
theCity under my disguise. In ten days I had the money and had paid
thedebt.“Well, you can imagine how hard it was to settle down to arduous workat
£ 2 a week when I knew that I could earn as much in a day bysmearing my face
with a little paint, laying my cap on the ground, andsitting still. It was a
long fight between my pride and the money, butthe dollars won at last, and I
threw up reporting and sat day after dayin the corner which I had first chosen,
inspiring pity by my ghastlyface and filling my pockets with coppers. Only one
man knew my secret.He was the keeper of a low den in which I used to lodge in
SwandamLane, where I could every morning emerge as a squalid beggar and in
theevenings transform myself into a well-dressed man about town. Thisfellow, a
Lascar, was well paid by me for his rooms, so that I knewthat my secret was safe
in his possession.“Well, very soon I found that I was saving considerable sums
of money.I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of London could earn £
700a year—which is less than my average takings—but I had exceptionaladvantages
in my power of making up, and also in a facility ofrepartee, which improved by
practice and made me quite a recognisedcharacter in the City. All day a stream
of pennies, varied by silver,poured in upon me, and it was a very bad day in
which I failed to take£ 2.“As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took a house
in the country,and eventually married, without anyone having a suspicion as to
my realoccupation. My dear wife knew that I had business in the City. Shelittle
knew what.“Last Monday I had finished for the day and was dressing in my
roomabove the opium den when I looked out of my window and saw, to myhorror and
astonishment, that my wife was standing in the street, withher eyes fixed full
upon me. I gave a cry of surprise, threw up my armsto cover my face, and,
rushing to my confidant, the Lascar, entreatedhim to prevent anyone from coming
up to me. I heard her voicedownstairs, but I knew that she could not ascend.
Swiftly I threw offmy clothes, pulled on those of a beggar, and put on my
pigments andwig. Even a wife’s eyes could not pierce so complete a disguise.
Butthen it occurred to me that there might be a search in the room, andthat the
clothes might betray me. I threw open the window, reopening bymy violence a
small cut which I had inflicted upon myself in thebedroom that morning. Then I
seized my coat, which was weighted by thecoppers which I had just transferred to
it from the leather bag inwhich I carried my takings. I hurled it out of the
window, and itdisappeared into the Thames. The other clothes would have
followed, butat that moment there was a rush of constables up the stair, and a
fewminutes after I found, rather, I confess, to my relief, that instead ofbeing
identified as Mr. Neville St. Clair, I was arrested as hismurderer.“I do not
know that there is anything else for me to explain. I wasdetermined to preserve
my disguise as long as possible, and hence mypreference for a dirty face.
Knowing that my wife would be terriblyanxious, I slipped off my ring and
confided it to the Lascar at amoment when no constable was watching me, together
with a hurriedscrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear.”“That note only
reached her yesterday,” said Holmes.“Good God! What a week she must have
spent!”“The police have watched this Lascar,” said Inspector Bradstreet, “andI
can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post a letterunobserved.
Probably he handed it to some sailor customer of his, whoforgot all about it for
some days.”“That was it,” said Holmes, nodding approvingly; “I have no doubt
ofit. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?”“Many times; but what was
a fine to me?”“It must stop here, however,” said Bradstreet. “If the police are
tohush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone.”“I have sworn it by
the most solemn oaths which a man can take.”“In that case I think that it is
probable that no further steps may betaken. But if you are found again, then all
must come out. I am sure,Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for
having clearedthe matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your results.”“I
reached this one,” said my friend, “by sitting upon five pillows andconsuming an
ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to BakerStreet we shall just be
in time for breakfast.”VII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLEI had called upon
my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second morningafter Christmas, with the
intention of wishing him the compliments ofthe season. He was lounging upon the
sofa in a purple dressing-gown, apipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and
a pile of crumpledmorning papers, evidently newly studied, near at hand. Beside
the couchwas a wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very seedy
anddisreputable hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked inseveral
places. A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of the chairsuggested that the
hat had been suspended in this manner for thepurpose of examination.“You are
engaged,” said I; “perhaps I interrupt you.”“Not at all. I am glad to have a
friend with whom I can discuss myresults. The matter is a perfectly trivial
one”—he jerked his thumb inthe direction of the old hat—“but there are points in
connection withit which are not entirely devoid of interest and even of
instruction.”I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before
hiscrackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows werethick with
the ice crystals. “I suppose,” I remarked, “that, homely asit looks, this thing
has some deadly story linked on to it—that it isthe clue which will guide you in
the solution of some mystery and thepunishment of some crime.”“No, no. No
crime,” said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. “Only one of thosewhimsical little
incidents which will happen when you have four millionhuman beings all jostling
each other within the space of a few squaremiles. Amid the action and reaction
of so dense a swarm of humanity,every possible combination of events may be
expected to take place, andmany a little problem will be presented which may be
striking andbizarre without being criminal. We have already had experience
ofsuch.”“So much so,” I remarked, “that of the last six cases which I haveadded
to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime.”“Precisely. You
allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adler papers,to the singular case of
Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the adventure ofthe man with the twisted lip. Well,
I have no doubt that this smallmatter will fall into the same innocent category.
You know Peterson,the commissionaire?”“Yes.”“It is to him that this trophy
belongs.”“It is his hat.”“No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that
you will lookupon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual
problem.And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas morning,in
company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roastingat this moment
in front of Peterson’s fire. The facts are these: aboutfour o’clock on Christmas
morning, Peterson, who, as you know, is avery honest fellow, was returning from
some small jollification and wasmaking his way homeward down Tottenham Court
Road. In front of him hesaw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a
slight stagger, andcarrying a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached
thecorner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger and alittle
knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked off the man’s hat, onwhich he raised
his stick to defend himself and, swinging it over hishead, smashed the shop
window behind him. Peterson had rushed forwardto protect the stranger from his
assailants; but the man, shocked athaving broken the window, and seeing an
official-looking person inuniform rushing towards him, dropped his goose, took
to his heels, andvanished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the
back ofTottenham Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the appearance
ofPeterson, so that he was left in possession of the field of battle, andalso of
the spoils of victory in the shape of this battered hat and amost unimpeachable
Christmas goose.”“Which surely he restored to their owner?”“My dear fellow,
there lies the problem. It is true that ‘For Mrs.Henry Baker’ was printed upon a
small card which was tied to the bird’sleft leg, and it is also true that the
initials ‘H. B.’ are legibleupon the lining of this hat, but as there are some
thousands of Bakers,and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it
is not easyto restore lost property to any one of them.”“What, then, did
Peterson do?”“He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas
morning,knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me. Thegoose
we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, inspite of the
slight frost, it would be well that it should be eatenwithout unnecessary delay.
Its finder has carried it off, therefore, tofulfil the ultimate destiny of a
goose, while I continue to retain thehat of the unknown gentleman who lost his
Christmas dinner.”“Did he not advertise?”“No.”“Then, what clue could you have as
to his identity?”“Only as much as we can deduce.”“From his hat?”“Precisely.”“But
you are joking. What can you gather from this old battered felt?”“Here is my
lens. You know my methods. What can you gather yourself asto the individuality
of the man who has worn this article?”I took the tattered object in my hands and
turned it over ratherruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual
round shape,hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of red silk,
butwas a good deal discoloured. There was no maker’s name; but, as Holmeshad
remarked, the initials “H. B.” were scrawled upon one side. It waspierced in the
brim for a hat-securer, but the elastic was missing. Forthe rest, it was
cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in severalplaces, although there seemed
to have been some attempt to hide thediscoloured patches by smearing them with
ink.“I can see nothing,” said I, handing it back to my friend.“On the contrary,
Watson, you can see everything. You fail, however, toreason from what you see.
You are too timid in drawing yourinferences.”“Then, pray tell me what it is that
you can infer from this hat?”He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar
introspective fashionwhich was characteristic of him. “It is perhaps less
suggestive than itmight have been,” he remarked, “and yet there are a few
inferenceswhich are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least
astrong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectual isof course
obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was fairlywell-to-do within the
last three years, although he has now fallen uponevil days. He had foresight,
but has less now than formerly, pointingto a moral retrogression, which, when
taken with the decline of hisfortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence,
probably drink, atwork upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact that
his wifehas ceased to love him.”“My dear Holmes!”“He has, however, retained some
degree of self-respect,” he continued,disregarding my remonstrance. “He is a man
who leads a sedentary life,goes out little, is out of training entirely, is
middle-aged, hasgrizzled hair which he has had cut within the last few days, and
whichhe anoints with lime-cream. These are the more patent facts which areto be
deduced from his hat. Also, by the way, that it is extremelyimprobable that he
has gas laid on in his house.”“You are certainly joking, Holmes.”“Not in the
least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you theseresults, you are
unable to see how they are attained?”“I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but
I must confess that I amunable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce
that this man wasintellectual?”For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head.
It came right over theforehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. “It is a
question ofcubic capacity,” said he; “a man with so large a brain must
havesomething in it.”“The decline of his fortunes, then?”“This hat is three
years old. These flat brims curled at the edge camein then. It is a hat of the
very best quality. Look at the band ofribbed silk and the excellent lining. If
this man could afford to buyso expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no
hat since, then hehas assuredly gone down in the world.”“Well, that is clear
enough, certainly. But how about the foresight andthe moral
retrogression?”Sherlock Holmes laughed. “Here is the foresight,” said he putting
hisfinger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer. “They arenever sold
upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of acertain amount of
foresight, since he went out of his way to take thisprecaution against the wind.
But since we see that he has broken theelastic and has not troubled to replace
it, it is obvious that he hasless foresight now than formerly, which is a
distinct proof of aweakening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavoured to
conceal someof these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is a
signthat he has not entirely lost his self-respect.”“Your reasoning is certainly
plausible.”“The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is
grizzled,that it has been recently cut, and that he uses lime-cream, are all
tobe gathered from a close examination of the lower part of the lining.The lens
discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cut by thescissors of the barber.
They all appear to be adhesive, and there is adistinct odour of lime-cream. This
dust, you will observe, is not thegritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy
brown dust of the house,showing that it has been hung up indoors most of the
time, while themarks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive that the
wearerperspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be in the best
oftraining.”“But his wife—you said that she had ceased to love him.”“This hat
has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dearWatson, with a week’s
accumulation of dust upon your hat, and when yourwife allows you to go out in
such a state, I shall fear that you alsohave been unfortunate enough to lose
your wife’s affection.”“But he might be a bachelor.”“Nay, he was bringing home
the goose as a peace-offering to his wife.Remember the card upon the bird’s
leg.”“You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deduce thatthe
gas is not laid on in his house?”“One tallow stain, or even two, might come by
chance; but when I see noless than five, I think that there can be little doubt
that theindividual must be brought into frequent contact with
burningtallow—walks upstairs at night probably with his hat in one hand and
aguttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stains froma
gas-jet. Are you satisfied?”“Well, it is very ingenious,” said I, laughing; “but
since, as you saidjust now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm done
save theloss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of energy.”Sherlock
Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flew open,and Peterson, the
commissionaire, rushed into the apartment withflushed cheeks and the face of a
man who is dazed with astonishment.“The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, sir!” he
gasped.“Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped off throughthe
kitchen window?” Holmes twisted himself round upon the sofa to geta fairer view
of the man’s excited face.“See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!”
He held out hishand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a
brilliantlyscintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but
ofsuch purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in thedark
hollow of his hand.Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. “By Jove, Peterson!”
said he,“this is treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you have got?”“A
diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though it wereputty.”“It’s
more than a precious stone. It is _the_ precious stone.”“Not the Countess of
Morcar’s blue carbuncle!” I ejaculated.“Precisely so. I ought to know its size
and shape, seeing that I haveread the advertisement about it in _The Times_
every day lately. It isabsolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured,
but thereward offered of £ 1000 is certainly not within a twentieth part ofthe
market price.”“A thousand pounds! Great Lord of mercy!” The commissionaire
plumpeddown into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.“That is the
reward, and I have reason to know that there aresentimental considerations in
the background which would induce theCountess to part with half her fortune if
she could but recover thegem.”“It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel
Cosmopolitan,” Iremarked.“Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago.
John Horner, aplumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the
lady’sjewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case hasbeen
referred to the Assizes. I have some account of the matter here, Ibelieve.” He
rummaged amid his newspapers, glancing over the dates,until at last he smoothed
one out, doubled it over, and read thefollowing paragraph:“Hotel Cosmopolitan
Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, wasbrought up upon the charge of having
upon the 22nd inst., abstractedfrom the jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar the
valuable gem known asthe blue carbuncle. James Ryder, upper-attendant at the
hotel, gave hisevidence to the effect that he had shown Horner up to the
dressing-roomof the Countess of Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order that
hemight solder the second bar of the grate, which was loose. He hadremained with
Horner some little time, but had finally been calledaway. On returning, he found
that Horner had disappeared, that thebureau had been forced open, and that the
small morocco casket inwhich, as it afterwards transpired, the Countess was
accustomed to keepher jewel, was lying empty upon the dressing-table. Ryder
instantlygave the alarm, and Horner was arrested the same evening; but the
stonecould not be found either upon his person or in his rooms. CatherineCusack,
maid to the Countess, deposed to having heard Ryder’s cry ofdismay on
discovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room,where she found
matters as described by the last witness. InspectorBradstreet, B division, gave
evidence as to the arrest of Horner, whostruggled frantically, and protested his
innocence in the strongestterms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery
having been givenagainst the prisoner, the magistrate refused to deal summarily
with theoffence, but referred it to the Assizes. Horner, who had shown signs
ofintense emotion during the proceedings, fainted away at the conclusionand was
carried out of court.”“Hum! So much for the police-court,” said Holmes
thoughtfully, tossingaside the paper. “The question for us now to solve is the
sequence ofevents leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the crop of
agoose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see, Watson, our
littledeductions have suddenly assumed a much more important and lessinnocent
aspect. Here is the stone; the stone came from the goose, andthe goose came from
Mr. Henry Baker, the gentleman with the bad hat andall the other characteristics
with which I have bored you. So now wemust set ourselves very seriously to
finding this gentleman andascertaining what part he has played in this little
mystery. To dothis, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie
undoubtedlyin an advertisement in all the evening papers. If this fail, I
shallhave recourse to other methods.”“What will you say?”“Give me a pencil and
that slip of paper. Now, then: ‘Found at thecorner of Goodge Street, a goose and
a black felt hat. Mr. Henry Bakercan have the same by applying at 6:30 this
evening at 221B, BakerStreet.’ That is clear and concise.”“Very. But will he see
it?”“Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor man,the
loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mischance inbreaking the
window and by the approach of Peterson that he thought ofnothing but flight, but
since then he must have bitterly regretted theimpulse which caused him to drop
his bird. Then, again, theintroduction of his name will cause him to see it, for
everyone whoknows him will direct his attention to it. Here you are, Peterson,
rundown to the advertising agency and have this put in the eveningpapers.”“In
which, sir?”“Oh, in the _Globe_, _Star_, _Pall Mall_, _St. James’s
Gazette_,_Evening News_, _Standard_, _Echo_, and any others that occur to
you.”“Very well, sir. And this stone?”“Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank
you. And, I say, Peterson, justbuy a goose on your way back and leave it here
with me, for we musthave one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which
yourfamily is now devouring.”When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up
the stone and held itagainst the light. “It’s a bonny thing,” said he. “Just see
how itglints and sparkles. Of course it is a nucleus and focus of crime.Every
good stone is. They are the devil’s pet baits. In the larger andolder jewels
every facet may stand for a bloody deed. This stone is notyet twenty years old.
It was found in the banks of the Amoy River insouthern China and is remarkable
in having every characteristic of thecarbuncle, save that it is blue in shade
instead of ruby red. In spiteof its youth, it has already a sinister history.
There have been twomurders, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide, and several robberies
broughtabout for the sake of this forty-grain weight of crystallised
charcoal.Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor to the
gallowsand the prison? I’ll lock it up in my strong box now and drop a line
tothe Countess to say that we have it.”“Do you think that this man Horner is
innocent?”“I cannot tell.”“Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry
Baker, hadanything to do with the matter?”“It is, I think, much more likely that
Henry Baker is an absolutelyinnocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he
was carrying wasof considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold.
That,however, I shall determine by a very simple test if we have an answerto our
advertisement.”“And you can do nothing until then?”“Nothing.”“In that case I
shall continue my professional round. But I shall comeback in the evening at the
hour you have mentioned, for I should liketo see the solution of so tangled a
business.”“Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I
believe.By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I ought to ask
Mrs.Hudson to examine its crop.”I had been delayed at a case, and it was a
little after half-past sixwhen I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I
approached thehouse I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which
wasbuttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the bright semicircle whichwas
thrown from the fanlight. Just as I arrived the door was opened,and we were
shown up together to Holmes’ room.“Mr. Henry Baker, I believe,” said he, rising
from his armchair andgreeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which
he could soreadily assume. “Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is
acold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted forsummer than
for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the righttime. Is that your hat,
Mr. Baker?”“Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat.”He was a large man with
rounded shoulders, a massive head, and a broad,intelligent face, sloping down to
a pointed beard of grizzled brown. Atouch of red in nose and cheeks, with a
slight tremor of his extendedhand, recalled Holmes’ surmise as to his habits.
His rusty blackfrock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with the collar turned
up,and his lank wrists protruded from his sleeves without a sign of cuffor
shirt. He spoke in a slow staccato fashion, choosing his words withcare, and
gave the impression generally of a man of learning andletters who had had
ill-usage at the hands of fortune.“We have retained these things for some days,”
said Holmes, “because weexpected to see an advertisement from you giving your
address. I am ata loss to know now why you did not advertise.”Our visitor gave a
rather shamefaced laugh. “Shillings have not been soplentiful with me as they
once were,” he remarked. “I had no doubt thatthe gang of roughs who assaulted me
had carried off both my hat and thebird. I did not care to spend more money in a
hopeless attempt atrecovering them.”“Very naturally. By the way, about the bird,
we were compelled to eatit.”“To eat it!” Our visitor half rose from his chair in
his excitement.“Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so.
But Ipresume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is about thesame
weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equallywell?”“Oh,
certainly, certainly,” answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of relief.“Of course, we
still have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on of yourown bird, so if you
wish—”The man burst into a hearty laugh. “They might be useful to me asrelics of
my adventure,” said he, “but beyond that I can hardly seewhat use the _disjecta
membra_ of my late acquaintance are going to beto me. No, sir, I think that,
with your permission, I will confine myattentions to the excellent bird which I
perceive upon the sideboard.”Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a
slight shrug of hisshoulders.“There is your hat, then, and there your bird,”
said he. “By the way,would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one
from? I amsomewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better
growngoose.”“Certainly, sir,” said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly
gainedproperty under his arm. “There are a few of us who frequent the AlphaInn,
near the Museum—we are to be found in the Museum itself during theday, you
understand. This year our good host, Windigate by name,instituted a goose club,
by which, on consideration of some few penceevery week, we were each to receive
a bird at Christmas. My pence wereduly paid, and the rest is familiar to you. I
am much indebted to you,sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years
nor my gravity.”With a comical pomposity of manner he bowed solemnly to both of
us andstrode off upon his way.“So much for Mr. Henry Baker,” said Holmes when he
had closed the doorbehind him. “It is quite certain that he knows nothing
whatever aboutthe matter. Are you hungry, Watson?”“Not particularly.”“Then I
suggest that we turn our dinner into a supper and follow upthis clue while it is
still hot.”“By all means.”It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and
wrapped cravatsabout our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly in
acloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out into smokelike so many
pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out crisply and loudly aswe swung through the
doctors’ quarter, Wimpole Street, Harley Street,and so through Wigmore Street
into Oxford Street. In a quarter of anhour we were in Bloomsbury at the Alpha
Inn, which is a smallpublic-house at the corner of one of the streets which runs
down intoHolborn. Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar and ordered
twoglasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.“Your beer
should be excellent if it is as good as your geese,” saidhe.“My geese!” The man
seemed surprised.“Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker,
who wasa member of your goose club.”“Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them’s
not _our_ geese.”“Indeed! Whose, then?”“Well, I got the two dozen from a
salesman in Covent Garden.”“Indeed? I know some of them. Which was
it?”“Breckinridge is his name.”“Ah! I don’t know him. Well, here’s your good
health landlord, andprosperity to your house. Good-night.”“Now for Mr.
Breckinridge,” he continued, buttoning up his coat as wecame out into the frosty
air. “Remember, Watson that though we have sohomely a thing as a goose at one
end of this chain, we have at theother a man who will certainly get seven years’
penal servitude unlesswe can establish his innocence. It is possible that our
inquiry may butconfirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of
investigationwhich has been missed by the police, and which a singular chance
hasplaced in our hands. Let us follow it out to the bitter end. Faces tothe
south, then, and quick march!”We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and
so through a zigzagof slums to Covent Garden Market. One of the largest stalls
bore thename of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor a horsey-looking
man,with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was helping a boy to put upthe
shutters.“Good-evening. It’s a cold night,” said Holmes.The salesman nodded and
shot a questioning glance at my companion.“Sold out of geese, I see,” continued
Holmes, pointing at the bareslabs of marble.“Let you have five hundred to-morrow
morning.”“That’s no good.”“Well, there are some on the stall with the
gas-flare.”“Ah, but I was recommended to you.”“Who by?”“The landlord of the
Alpha.”“Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen.”“Fine birds they were, too. Now
where did you get them from?”To my surprise the question provoked a burst of
anger from thesalesman.“Now, then, mister,” said he, with his head cocked and
his arms akimbo,“what are you driving at? Let’s have it straight, now.”“It is
straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geesewhich you supplied
to the Alpha.”“Well then, I shan’t tell you. So now!”“Oh, it is a matter of no
importance; but I don’t know why you shouldbe so warm over such a trifle.”“Warm!
You’d be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. When Ipay good money
for a good article there should be an end of thebusiness; but it’s ‘Where are
the geese?’ and ‘Who did you sell thegeese to?’ and ‘What will you take for the
geese?’ One would think theywere the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss
that is made overthem.”“Well, I have no connection with any other people who
have been makinginquiries,” said Holmes carelessly. “If you won’t tell us the
bet isoff, that is all. But I’m always ready to back my opinion on a matterof
fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is countrybred.”“Well, then,
you’ve lost your fiver, for it’s town bred,” snapped thesalesman.“It’s nothing
of the kind.”“I say it is.”“I don’t believe it.”“D’you think you know more about
fowls than I, who have handled themever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all
those birds that went to theAlpha were town bred.”“You’ll never persuade me to
believe that.”“Will you bet, then?”“It’s merely taking your money, for I know
that I am right. But I’llhave a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to
be obstinate.”The salesman chuckled grimly. “Bring me the books, Bill,” said
he.The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a greatgreasy-backed one,
laying them out together beneath the hanging lamp.“Now then, Mr. Cocksure,” said
the salesman, “I thought that I was outof geese, but before I finish you’ll find
that there is still one leftin my shop. You see this little book?”“Well?”“That’s
the list of the folk from whom I buy. D’you see? Well, then,here on this page
are the country folk, and the numbers after theirnames are where their accounts
are in the big ledger. Now, then! Yousee this other page in red ink? Well, that
is a list of my townsuppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to
me.”“Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road—249,” read Holmes.“Quite so. Now turn that
up in the ledger.”Holmes turned to the page indicated. “Here you are, ‘Mrs.
Oakshott,117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.’”“Now, then, what’s the
last entry?”“‘December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7_s_. 6_d_.’”“Quite so. There
you are. And underneath?”“‘Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at 12_s_.’”“What
have you to say now?”Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a
sovereign from hispocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the
air of aman whose disgust is too deep for words. A few yards off he stoppedunder
a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion whichwas peculiar to
him.“When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the ‘Pink ’un’protruding
out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet,” saidhe. “I daresay that if
I had put £ 100 down in front of him, that manwould not have given me such
complete information as was drawn from himby the idea that he was doing me on a
wager. Well, Watson, we are, Ifancy, nearing the end of our quest, and the only
point which remainsto be determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs.
Oakshottto-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It is clearfrom
what that surly fellow said that there are others besidesourselves who are
anxious about the matter, and I should—”His remarks were suddenly cut short by a
loud hubbub which broke outfrom the stall which we had just left. Turning round
we saw a littlerat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of yellow
lightwhich was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, thesalesman,
framed in the door of his stall, was shaking his fistsfiercely at the cringing
figure.“I’ve had enough of you and your geese,” he shouted. “I wish you wereall
at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more with yoursilly talk
I’ll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here andI’ll answer her, but
what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geeseoff you?”“No; but one of them
was mine all the same,” whined the little man.“Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for
it.”“She told me to ask you.”“Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I
care. I’ve had enoughof it. Get out of this!” He rushed fiercely forward, and
the inquirerflitted away into the darkness.“Ha! this may save us a visit to
Brixton Road,” whispered Holmes. “Comewith me, and we will see what is to be
made of this fellow.” Stridingthrough the scattered knots of people who lounged
round the flaringstalls, my companion speedily overtook the little man and
touched himupon the shoulder. He sprang round, and I could see in the
gas-lightthat every vestige of colour had been driven from his face.“Who are
you, then? What do you want?” he asked in a quavering voice.“You will excuse
me,” said Holmes blandly, “but I could not helpoverhearing the questions which
you put to the salesman just now. Ithink that I could be of assistance to
you.”“You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the matter?”“My name is
Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what otherpeople don’t know.”“But you
can know nothing of this?”“Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are
endeavouring to trace somegeese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton
Road, to a salesmannamed Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windigate, of the
Alpha, andby him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a member.”“Oh, sir,
you are the very man whom I have longed to meet,” cried thelittle fellow with
outstretched hands and quivering fingers. “I canhardly explain to you how
interested I am in this matter.”Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was
passing. “In that casewe had better discuss it in a cosy room rather than in
this wind-sweptmarket-place,” said he. “But pray tell me, before we go farther,
who itis that I have the pleasure of assisting.”The man hesitated for an
instant. “My name is John Robinson,” heanswered with a sidelong glance.“No, no;
the real name,” said Holmes sweetly. “It is always awkwarddoing business with an
alias.”A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. “Well then,” saidhe,
“my real name is James Ryder.”“Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel
Cosmopolitan. Pray step intothe cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you
everything which youwould wish to know.”The little man stood glancing from one
to the other of us withhalf-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not
sure whether heis on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe. Then he
stepped intothe cab, and in half an hour we were back in the sitting-room at
BakerStreet. Nothing had been said during our drive, but the high, thinbreathing
of our new companion, and the claspings and unclaspings ofhis hands, spoke of
the nervous tension within him.“Here we are!” said Holmes cheerily as we filed
into the room. “Thefire looks very seasonable in this weather. You look cold,
Mr. Ryder.Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before
wesettle this little matter of yours. Now, then! You want to know whatbecame of
those geese?”“Yes, sir.”“Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I
imagine in whichyou were interested—white, with a black bar across the
tail.”Ryder quivered with emotion. “Oh, sir,” he cried, “can you tell mewhere it
went to?”“It came here.”“Here?”“Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I
don’t wonder that youshould take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was
dead—thebonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen. I have it herein
my museum.”Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece with
hisright hand. Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up the bluecarbuncle,
which shone out like a star, with a cold, brilliant,many-pointed radiance. Ryder
stood glaring with a drawn face, uncertainwhether to claim or to disown it.“The
game’s up, Ryder,” said Holmes quietly. “Hold up, man, or you’llbe into the
fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. He’s notgot blood enough to
go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash ofbrandy. So! Now he looks a
little more human. What a shrimp it is, tobe sure!”For a moment he had staggered
and nearly fallen, but the brandy broughta tinge of colour into his cheeks, and
he sat staring with frightenedeyes at his accuser.“I have almost every link in
my hands, and all the proofs which I couldpossibly need, so there is little
which you need tell me. Still, thatlittle may as well be cleared up to make the
case complete. You hadheard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess of
Morcar’s?”“It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it,” said he in a
cracklingvoice.“I see—her ladyship’s waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of
suddenwealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it has been forbetter
men before you; but you were not very scrupulous in the meansyou used. It seems
to me, Ryder, that there is the making of a verypretty villain in you. You knew
that this man Horner, the plumber, hadbeen concerned in some such matter before,
and that suspicion wouldrest the more readily upon him. What did you do, then?
You made somesmall job in my lady’s room—you and your confederate Cusack—and
youmanaged that he should be the man sent for. Then, when he had left, yourifled
the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this unfortunate manarrested. You
then—”Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at
mycompanion’s knees. “For God’s sake, have mercy!” he shrieked. “Think ofmy
father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never wentwrong before! I
never will again. I swear it. I’ll swear it on a Bible.Oh, don’t bring it into
court! For Christ’s sake, don’t!”“Get back into your chair!” said Holmes
sternly. “It is very well tocringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough
of this poor Hornerin the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing.”“I will
fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, sir. Then the chargeagainst him will
break down.”“Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account
ofthe next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the gooseinto
the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies your only hopeof
safety.”Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. “I will tell you it
justas it happened, sir,” said he. “When Horner had been arrested, itseemed to
me that it would be best for me to get away with the stone atonce, for I did not
know at what moment the police might not take itinto their heads to search me
and my room. There was no place about thehotel where it would be safe. I went
out, as if on some commission, andI made for my sister’s house. She had married
a man named Oakshott, andlived in Brixton Road, where she fattened fowls for the
market. All theway there every man I met seemed to me to be a policeman or
adetective; and, for all that it was a cold night, the sweat was pouringdown my
face before I came to the Brixton Road. My sister asked me whatwas the matter,
and why I was so pale; but I told her that I had beenupset by the jewel robbery
at the hotel. Then I went into the back yardand smoked a pipe and wondered what
it would be best to do.“I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the
bad, and has justbeen serving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met me,
and fellinto talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get rid of
whatthey stole. I knew that he would be true to me, for I knew one or twothings
about him; so I made up my mind to go right on to Kilburn, wherehe lived, and
take him into my confidence. He would show me how to turnthe stone into money.
But how to get to him in safety? I thought of theagonies I had gone through in
coming from the hotel. I might at anymoment be seized and searched, and there
would be the stone in mywaistcoat pocket. I was leaning against the wall at the
time andlooking at the geese which were waddling about round my feet,
andsuddenly an idea came into my head which showed me how I could beat thebest
detective that ever lived.“My sister had told me some weeks before that I might
have the pick ofher geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that she was
always asgood as her word. I would take my goose now, and in it I would carry
mystone to Kilburn. There was a little shed in the yard, and behind thisI drove
one of the birds—a fine big one, white, with a barred tail. Icaught it, and
prying its bill open, I thrust the stone down its throatas far as my finger
could reach. The bird gave a gulp, and I felt thestone pass along its gullet and
down into its crop. But the creatureflapped and struggled, and out came my
sister to know what was thematter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke
loose and flutteredoff among the others.“‘Whatever were you doing with that
bird, Jem?’ says she.“‘Well,’ said I, ‘you said you’d give me one for Christmas,
and I wasfeeling which was the fattest.’“‘Oh,’ says she, ‘we’ve set yours aside
for you—Jem’s bird, we call it.It’s the big white one over yonder. There’s
twenty-six of them, whichmakes one for you, and one for us, and two dozen for
the market.’“‘Thank you, Maggie,’ says I; ‘but if it is all the same to you,
I’drather have that one I was handling just now.’“‘The other is a good three
pound heavier,’ said she, ‘and we fattenedit expressly for you.’“‘Never mind.
I’ll have the other, and I’ll take it now,’ said I.“‘Oh, just as you like,’ said
she, a little huffed. ‘Which is it youwant, then?’“‘That white one with the
barred tail, right in the middle of theflock.’“‘Oh, very well. Kill it and take
it with you.’“Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I carried the bird all
theway to Kilburn. I told my pal what I had done, for he was a man that itwas
easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed until he choked, andwe got a knife
and opened the goose. My heart turned to water, forthere was no sign of the
stone, and I knew that some terrible mistakehad occurred. I left the bird,
rushed back to my sister’s, and hurriedinto the back yard. There was not a bird
to be seen there.“‘Where are they all, Maggie?’ I cried.“‘Gone to the dealer’s,
Jem.’“‘Which dealer’s?’“‘Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.’“‘But was there another
with a barred tail?’ I asked, ‘the same as theone I chose?’“‘Yes, Jem; there
were two barred-tailed ones, and I could never tellthem apart.’“Well, then, of
course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my feetwould carry me to this man
Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot atonce, and not one word would he tell me
as to where they had gone. Youheard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always
answered me likethat. My sister thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I think
that I ammyself. And now—and now I am myself a branded thief, without everhaving
touched the wealth for which I sold my character. God help me!God help me!” He
burst into convulsive sobbing, with his face buried inhis hands.There was a long
silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and by themeasured tapping of
Sherlock Holmes’ finger-tips upon the edge of thetable. Then my friend rose and
threw open the door.“Get out!” said he.“What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you!”“No
more words. Get out!”And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter
upon thestairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running
footfallsfrom the street.“After all, Watson,” said Holmes, reaching up his hand
for his claypipe, “I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies.
IfHorner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow willnot
appear against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I amcommuting a
felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul.This fellow will not go
wrong again; he is too terribly frightened.Send him to gaol now, and you make
him a gaol-bird for life. Besides,it is the season of forgiveness. Chance has
put in our way a mostsingular and whimsical problem, and its solution is its own
reward. Ifyou will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we will
beginanother investigation, in which, also a bird will be the
chieffeature.”VIII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BANDOn glancing over my notes
of the seventy odd cases in which I haveduring the last eight years studied the
methods of my friend SherlockHolmes, I find many tragic, some comic, a large
number merely strange,but none commonplace; for, working as he did rather for
the love of hisart than for the acquirement of wealth, he refused to associate
himselfwith any investigation which did not tend towards the unusual, and
eventhe fantastic. Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall anywhich
presented more singular features than that which was associatedwith the
well-known Surrey family of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran. Theevents in question
occurred in the early days of my association withHolmes, when we were sharing
rooms as bachelors in Baker Street. It ispossible that I might have placed them
upon record before, but apromise of secrecy was made at the time, from which I
have only beenfreed during the last month by the untimely death of the lady to
whomthe pledge was given. It is perhaps as well that the facts should nowcome to
light, for I have reasons to know that there are widespreadrumours as to the
death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make thematter even more terrible
than the truth.It was early in April in the year ’83 that I woke one morning to
findSherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed. He wasa late
riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the mantelpiece showed methat it was only
a quarter-past seven, I blinked up at him in somesurprise, and perhaps just a
little resentment, for I was myselfregular in my habits.“Very sorry to knock you
up, Watson,” said he, “but it’s the common lotthis morning. Mrs. Hudson has been
knocked up, she retorted upon me,and I on you.”“What is it, then—a fire?”“No; a
client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a considerablestate of
excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now inthe sitting-room.
Now, when young ladies wander about the metropolis atthis hour of the morning,
and knock sleepy people up out of their beds,I presume that it is something very
pressing which they have tocommunicate. Should it prove to be an interesting
case, you would, I amsure, wish to follow it from the outset. I thought, at any
rate, that Ishould call you and give you the chance.”“My dear fellow, I would
not miss it for anything.”I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in
his professionalinvestigations, and in admiring the rapid deductions, as swift
asintuitions, and yet always founded on a logical basis with which heunravelled
the problems which were submitted to him. I rapidly threw onmy clothes and was
ready in a few minutes to accompany my friend downto the sitting-room. A lady
dressed in black and heavily veiled, whohad been sitting in the window, rose as
we entered.“Good-morning, madam,” said Holmes cheerily. “My name is
SherlockHolmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, beforewhom
you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am glad to seethat Mrs. Hudson
has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray draw upto it, and I shall order
you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe thatyou are shivering.”“It is not cold
which makes me shiver,” said the woman in a low voice,changing her seat as
requested.“What, then?”“It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror.” She raised her
veil as shespoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable state
ofagitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless frightened eyes,like
those of some hunted animal. Her features and figure were those ofa woman of
thirty, but her hair was shot with premature grey, and herexpression was weary
and haggard. Sherlock Holmes ran her over with oneof his quick,
all-comprehensive glances.“You must not fear,” said he soothingly, bending
forward and pattingher forearm. “We shall soon set matters right, I have no
doubt. Youhave come in by train this morning, I see.”“You know me, then?”“No,
but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm ofyour left glove.
You must have started early, and yet you had a gooddrive in a dog-cart, along
heavy roads, before you reached thestation.”The lady gave a violent start and
stared in bewilderment at mycompanion.“There is no mystery, my dear madam,” said
he, smiling. “The left armof your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than
seven places. Themarks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cart
whichthrows up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-handside
of the driver.”“Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct,” said
she. “Istarted from home before six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past, andcame
in by the first train to Waterloo. Sir, I can stand this strain nolonger; I
shall go mad if it continues. I have no one to turn to—none,save only one, who
cares for me, and he, poor fellow, can be of littleaid. I have heard of you, Mr.
Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs.Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of
her sore need. It was fromher that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think
that you couldhelp me, too, and at least throw a little light through the
densedarkness which surrounds me? At present it is out of my power to rewardyou
for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall be married,with the
control of my own income, and then at least you shall not findme
ungrateful.”Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, drew out a
smallcase-book, which he consulted.“Farintosh,” said he. “Ah yes, I recall the
case; it was concerned withan opal tiara. I think it was before your time,
Watson. I can only say,madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same care to
your case as Idid to that of your friend. As to reward, my profession is its
ownreward; but you are at liberty to defray whatever expenses I may be putto, at
the time which suits you best. And now I beg that you will laybefore us
everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon thematter.”“Alas!”
replied our visitor, “the very horror of my situation lies inthe fact that my
fears are so vague, and my suspicions depend soentirely upon small points, which
might seem trivial to another, thateven he to whom of all others I have a right
to look for help andadvice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the
fancies of anervous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from his
soothinganswers and averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you cansee
deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart. You mayadvise me how to
walk amid the dangers which encompass me.”“I am all attention, madam.”“My name
is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, who isthe last survivor of
one of the oldest Saxon families in England, theRoylotts of Stoke Moran, on the
western border of Surrey.”Holmes nodded his head. “The name is familiar to me,”
said he.“The family was at one time among the richest in England, and theestates
extended over the borders into Berkshire in the north, andHampshire in the west.
In the last century, however, four successiveheirs were of a dissolute and
wasteful disposition, and the family ruinwas eventually completed by a gambler
in the days of the Regency.Nothing was left save a few acres of ground, and
thetwo-hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed under a heavymortgage.
The last squire dragged out his existence there, living thehorrible life of an
aristocratic pauper; but his only son, mystepfather, seeing that he must adapt
himself to the new conditions,obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled
him to take amedical degree and went out to Calcutta, where, by his
professionalskill and his force of character, he established a large practice.
In afit of anger, however, caused by some robberies which had beenperpetrated in
the house, he beat his native butler to death andnarrowly escaped a capital
sentence. As it was, he suffered a long termof imprisonment and afterwards
returned to England a morose anddisappointed man.“When Dr. Roylott was in India
he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner, theyoung widow of Major-General Stoner, of
the Bengal Artillery. My sisterJulia and I were twins, and we were only two
years old at the time ofmy mother’s re-marriage. She had a considerable sum of
money—not lessthan £ 1000 a year—and this she bequeathed to Dr. Roylott
entirelywhile we resided with him, with a provision that a certain annual
sumshould be allowed to each of us in the event of our marriage. Shortlyafter
our return to England my mother died—she was killed eight yearsago in a railway
accident near Crewe. Dr. Roylott then abandoned hisattempts to establish himself
in practice in London and took us to livewith him in the old ancestral house at
Stoke Moran. The money which mymother had left was enough for all our wants, and
there seemed to be noobstacle to our happiness.“But a terrible change came over
our stepfather about this time.Instead of making friends and exchanging visits
with our neighbours,who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke
Moran back inthe old family seat, he shut himself up in his house and seldom
cameout save to indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever might cross hispath.
Violence of temper approaching to mania has been hereditary inthe men of the
family, and in my stepfather’s case it had, I believe,been intensified by his
long residence in the tropics. A series ofdisgraceful brawls took place, two of
which ended in the police-court,until at last he became the terror of the
village, and the folks wouldfly at his approach, for he is a man of immense
strength, andabsolutely uncontrollable in his anger.“Last week he hurled the
local blacksmith over a parapet into a stream,and it was only by paying over all
the money which I could gathertogether that I was able to avert another public
exposure. He had nofriends at all save the wandering gipsies, and he would give
thesevagabonds leave to encamp upon the few acres of bramble-covered landwhich
represent the family estate, and would accept in return thehospitality of their
tents, wandering away with them sometimes forweeks on end. He has a passion also
for Indian animals, which are sentover to him by a correspondent, and he has at
this moment a cheetah anda baboon, which wander freely over his grounds and are
feared by thevillagers almost as much as their master.“You can imagine from what
I say that my poor sister Julia and I had nogreat pleasure in our lives. No
servant would stay with us, and for along time we did all the work of the house.
She was but thirty at thetime of her death, and yet her hair had already begun
to whiten, evenas mine has.”“Your sister is dead, then?”“She died just two years
ago, and it is of her death that I wish tospeak to you. You can understand that,
living the life which I havedescribed, we were little likely to see anyone of
our own age andposition. We had, however, an aunt, my mother’s maiden sister,
MissHonoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we were occasionallyallowed to
pay short visits at this lady’s house. Julia went there atChristmas two years
ago, and met there a half-pay major of marines, towhom she became engaged. My
stepfather learned of the engagement whenmy sister returned and offered no
objection to the marriage; but withina fortnight of the day which had been fixed
for the wedding, theterrible event occurred which has deprived me of my only
companion.”Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes
closedand his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened his lids now andglanced
across at his visitor.“Pray be precise as to details,” said he.“It is easy for
me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time isseared into my memory. The
manor-house is, as I have already said, veryold, and only one wing is now
inhabited. The bedrooms in this wing areon the ground floor, the sitting-rooms
being in the central block ofthe buildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr.
Roylott’s, the secondmy sister’s, and the third my own. There is no
communication betweenthem, but they all open out into the same corridor. Do I
make myselfplain?”“Perfectly so.”“The windows of the three rooms open out upon
the lawn. That fatalnight Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though we knew
that hehad not retired to rest, for my sister was troubled by the smell of
thestrong Indian cigars which it was his custom to smoke. She left herroom,
therefore, and came into mine, where she sat for some time,chatting about her
approaching wedding. At eleven o’clock she rose toleave me, but she paused at
the door and looked back.“‘Tell me, Helen,’ said she, ‘have you ever heard
anyone whistle in thedead of the night?’“‘Never,’ said I.“‘I suppose that you
could not possibly whistle, yourself, in yoursleep?’“‘Certainly not. But
why?’“‘Because during the last few nights I have always, about three in
themorning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and it hasawakened
me. I cannot tell where it came from—perhaps from the nextroom, perhaps from the
lawn. I thought that I would just ask youwhether you had heard it.’“‘No, I have
not. It must be those wretched gipsies in the plantation.’“‘Very likely. And yet
if it were on the lawn, I wonder that you didnot hear it also.’“‘Ah, but I sleep
more heavily than you.’“‘Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.’ She
smiled back atme, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn
in thelock.”“Indeed,” said Holmes. “Was it your custom always to lock yourselves
inat night?”“Always.”“And why?”“I think that I mentioned to you that the Doctor
kept a cheetah and ababoon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were
locked.”“Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement.”“I could not sleep that
night. A vague feeling of impending misfortuneimpressed me. My sister and I, you
will recollect, were twins, and youknow how subtle are the links which bind two
souls which are so closelyallied. It was a wild night. The wind was howling
outside, and the rainwas beating and splashing against the windows. Suddenly,
amid all thehubbub of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream of a
terrifiedwoman. I knew that it was my sister’s voice. I sprang from my
bed,wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor. As I opened mydoor I
seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sister described, and afew moments
later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen.As I ran down the
passage, my sister’s door was unlocked, and revolvedslowly upon its hinges. I
stared at it horror-stricken, not knowingwhat was about to issue from it. By the
light of the corridor-lamp Isaw my sister appear at the opening, her face
blanched with terror, herhands groping for help, her whole figure swaying to and
fro like thatof a drunkard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at
thatmoment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. Shewrithed
as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfullyconvulsed. At first
I thought that she had not recognised me, but as Ibent over her she suddenly
shrieked out in a voice which I shall neverforget, ‘Oh, my God! Helen! It was
the band! The speckled band!’ Therewas something else which she would fain have
said, and she stabbed withher finger into the air in the direction of the
Doctor’s room, but afresh convulsion seized her and choked her words. I rushed
out, callingloudly for my stepfather, and I met him hastening from his room in
hisdressing-gown. When he reached my sister’s side she was unconscious,and
though he poured brandy down her throat and sent for medical aidfrom the
village, all efforts were in vain, for she slowly sank anddied without having
recovered her consciousness. Such was the dreadfulend of my beloved sister.”“One
moment,” said Holmes, “are you sure about this whistle andmetallic sound? Could
you swear to it?”“That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It
is mystrong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the galeand
the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been deceived.”“Was your
sister dressed?”“No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found
thecharred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box.”“Showing that she had
struck a light and looked about her when thealarm took place. That is important.
And what conclusions did thecoroner come to?”“He investigated the case with
great care, for Dr. Roylott’s conducthad long been notorious in the county, but
he was unable to find anysatisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that
the door had beenfastened upon the inner side, and the windows were blocked
byold-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured everynight.
The walls were carefully sounded, and were shown to be quitesolid all round, and
the flooring was also thoroughly examined, withthe same result. The chimney is
wide, but is barred up by four largestaples. It is certain, therefore, that my
sister was quite alone whenshe met her end. Besides, there were no marks of any
violence uponher.”“How about poison?”“The doctors examined her for it, but
without success.”“What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of,
then?”“It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, thoughwhat
it was that frightened her I cannot imagine.”“Were there gipsies in the
plantation at the time?”“Yes, there are nearly always some there.”“Ah, and what
did you gather from this allusion to a band—a speckledband?”“Sometimes I have
thought that it was merely the wild talk of delirium,sometimes that it may have
referred to some band of people, perhaps tothese very gipsies in the plantation.
I do not know whether the spottedhandkerchiefs which so many of them wear over
their heads might havesuggested the strange adjective which she used.”Holmes
shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.“These are very deep
waters,” said he; “pray go on with yournarrative.”“Two years have passed since
then, and my life has been until latelylonelier than ever. A month ago, however,
a dear friend, whom I haveknown for many years, has done me the honour to ask my
hand inmarriage. His name is Armitage—Percy Armitage—the second son of
Mr.Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My stepfather has offered
noopposition to the match, and we are to be married in the course of thespring.
Two days ago some repairs were started in the west wing of thebuilding, and my
bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I have had tomove into the chamber in
which my sister died, and to sleep in the verybed in which she slept. Imagine,
then, my thrill of terror when lastnight, as I lay awake, thinking over her
terrible fate, I suddenlyheard in the silence of the night the low whistle which
had been theherald of her own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, but nothing
wasto be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, however,so I
dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got adog-cart at the
Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead,from whence I have come
on this morning with the one object of seeingyou and asking your advice.”“You
have done wisely,” said my friend. “But have you told me all?”“Yes, all.”“Miss
Roylott, you have not. You are screening your stepfather.”“Why, what do you
mean?”For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed
thehand that lay upon our visitor’s knee. Five little livid spots, themarks of
four fingers and a thumb, were printed upon the white wrist.“You have been
cruelly used,” said Holmes.The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured
wrist. “He is ahard man,” she said, “and perhaps he hardly knows his own
strength.”There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin upon
hishands and stared into the crackling fire.“This is a very deep business,” he
said at last. “There are a thousanddetails which I should desire to know before
I decide upon our courseof action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we were
to come toStoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see over these
roomswithout the knowledge of your stepfather?”“As it happens, he spoke of
coming into town to-day upon some mostimportant business. It is probable that he
will be away all day, andthat there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a
housekeeper now,but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get her out of
the way.”“Excellent. You are not averse to this trip, Watson?”“By no
means.”“Then we shall both come. What are you going to do yourself?”“I have one
or two things which I would wish to do now that I am intown. But I shall return
by the twelve o’clock train, so as to be therein time for your coming.”“And you
may expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself some smallbusiness matters
to attend to. Will you not wait and breakfast?”“No, I must go. My heart is
lightened already since I have confided mytrouble to you. I shall look forward
to seeing you again thisafternoon.” She dropped her thick black veil over her
face and glidedfrom the room.“And what do you think of it all, Watson?” asked
Sherlock Holmes,leaning back in his chair.“It seems to me to be a most dark and
sinister business.”“Dark enough and sinister enough.”“Yet if the lady is correct
in saying that the flooring and walls aresound, and that the door, window, and
chimney are impassable, then hersister must have been undoubtedly alone when she
met her mysteriousend.”“What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and
what of the verypeculiar words of the dying woman?”“I cannot think.”“When you
combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of aband of gipsies who are
on intimate terms with this old doctor, thefact that we have every reason to
believe that the doctor has aninterest in preventing his stepdaughter’s
marriage, the dying allusionto a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen
Stoner heard ametallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal
barsthat secured the shutters falling back into its place, I think thatthere is
good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared alongthose lines.”“But
what, then, did the gipsies do?”“I cannot imagine.”“I see many objections to any
such theory.”“And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going
toStoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are fatal,or if
they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!”The ejaculation
had been drawn from my companion by the fact that ourdoor had been suddenly
dashed open, and that a huge man had framedhimself in the aperture. His costume
was a peculiar mixture of theprofessional and of the agricultural, having a
black top-hat, a longfrock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop
swinging inhis hand. So tall was he that his hat actually brushed the cross bar
ofthe doorway, and his breadth seemed to span it across from side toside. A
large face, seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow withthe sun, and
marked with every evil passion, was turned from one to theother of us, while his
deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin,fleshless nose, gave him somewhat
the resemblance to a fierce old birdof prey.“Which of you is Holmes?” asked this
apparition.“My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me,” said my
companionquietly.“I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran.”“Indeed, Doctor,”
said Holmes blandly. “Pray take a seat.”“I will do nothing of the kind. My
stepdaughter has been here. I havetraced her. What has she been saying to
you?”“It is a little cold for the time of the year,” said Holmes.“What has she
been saying to you?” screamed the old man furiously.“But I have heard that the
crocuses promise well,” continued mycompanion imperturbably.“Ha! You put me off,
do you?” said our new visitor, taking a stepforward and shaking his
hunting-crop. “I know you, you scoundrel! Ihave heard of you before. You are
Holmes, the meddler.”My friend smiled.“Holmes, the busybody!”His smile
broadened.“Holmes, the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office!”Holmes chuckled heartily.
“Your conversation is most entertaining,”said he. “When you go out close the
door, for there is a decideddraught.”“I will go when I have had my say. Don’t
you dare to meddle with myaffairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I
traced her! I am adangerous man to fall foul of! See here.” He stepped swiftly
forward,seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown
hands.“See that you keep yourself out of my grip,” he snarled, and hurlingthe
twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the room.“He seems a very
amiable person,” said Holmes, laughing. “I am notquite so bulky, but if he had
remained I might have shown him that mygrip was not much more feeble than his
own.” As he spoke he picked upthe steel poker and, with a sudden effort,
straightened it out again.“Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with
the officialdetective force! This incident gives zest to our
investigation,however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer
fromher imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson, weshall
order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk down to Doctors’Commons, where I
hope to get some data which may help us in thismatter.”It was nearly one o’clock
when Sherlock Holmes returned from hisexcursion. He held in his hand a sheet of
blue paper, scrawled overwith notes and figures.“I have seen the will of the
deceased wife,” said he. “To determine itsexact meaning I have been obliged to
work out the present prices of theinvestments with which it is concerned. The
total income, which at thetime of the wife’s death was little short of £ 1,100,
is now, throughthe fall in agricultural prices, not more than £ 750. Each
daughter canclaim an income of £ 250, in case of marriage. It is
evident,therefore, that if both girls had married, this beauty would have had
amere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him to a veryserious
extent. My morning’s work has not been wasted, since it hasproved that he has
the very strongest motives for standing in the wayof anything of the sort. And
now, Watson, this is too serious fordawdling, especially as the old man is aware
that we are interestingourselves in his affairs; so if you are ready, we shall
call a cab anddrive to Waterloo. I should be very much obliged if you would slip
yourrevolver into your pocket. An Eley’s No. 2 is an excellent argumentwith
gentlemen who can twist steel pokers into knots. That and atooth-brush are, I
think, all that we need.”At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for
Leatherhead,where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove for four or
fivemiles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a perfect day, with abright
sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The trees andwayside hedges were
just throwing out their first green shoots, and theair was full of the pleasant
smell of the moist earth. To me at leastthere was a strange contrast between the
sweet promise of the springand this sinister quest upon which we were engaged.
My companion sat inthe front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down
over hiseyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the deepest
thought.Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on the shoulder, and
pointedover the meadows.“Look there!” said he.A heavily timbered park stretched
up in a gentle slope, thickening intoa grove at the highest point. From amid the
branches there jutted outthe grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old
mansion.“Stoke Moran?” said he.“Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby
Roylott,” remarked thedriver.“There is some building going on there,” said
Holmes; “that is where weare going.”“There’s the village,” said the driver,
pointing to a cluster of roofssome distance to the left; “but if you want to get
to the house, you’llfind it shorter to get over this stile, and so by the
footpath over thefields. There it is, where the lady is walking.”“And the lady,
I fancy, is Miss Stoner,” observed Holmes, shading hiseyes. “Yes, I think we had
better do as you suggest.”We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back
on its way toLeatherhead.“I thought it as well,” said Holmes as we climbed the
stile, “that thisfellow should think we had come here as architects, or on some
definitebusiness. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You
seethat we have been as good as our word.”Our client of the morning had hurried
forward to meet us with a facewhich spoke her joy. “I have been waiting so
eagerly for you,” shecried, shaking hands with us warmly. “All has turned out
splendidly.Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be
backbefore evening.”“We have had the pleasure of making the Doctor’s
acquaintance,” saidHolmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred.
MissStoner turned white to the lips as she listened.“Good heavens!” she cried,
“he has followed me, then.”“So it appears.”“He is so cunning that I never know
when I am safe from him. What willhe say when he returns?”“He must guard
himself, for he may find that there is someone morecunning than himself upon his
track. You must lock yourself up from himto-night. If he is violent, we shall
take you away to your aunt’s atHarrow. Now, we must make the best use of our
time, so kindly take usat once to the rooms which we are to examine.”The
building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high centralportion and two
curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown out oneach side. In one of these
wings the windows were broken and blockedwith wooden boards, while the roof was
partly caved in, a picture ofruin. The central portion was in little better
repair, but theright-hand block was comparatively modern, and the blinds in
thewindows, with the blue smoke curling up from the chimneys, showed thatthis
was where the family resided. Some scaffolding had been erectedagainst the end
wall, and the stone-work had been broken into, butthere were no signs of any
workmen at the moment of our visit. Holmeswalked slowly up and down the
ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deepattention the outsides of the
windows.“This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep,
thecentre one to your sister’s, and the one next to the main building toDr.
Roylott’s chamber?”“Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle
one.”“Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does notseem
to be any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall.”“There were none. I
believe that it was an excuse to move me from myroom.”“Ah! that is suggestive.
Now, on the other side of this narrow wingruns the corridor from which these
three rooms open. There are windowsin it, of course?”“Yes, but very small ones.
Too narrow for anyone to pass through.”“As you both locked your doors at night,
your rooms were unapproachablefrom that side. Now, would you have the kindness
to go into your roomand bar your shutters?”Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after
a careful examination through theopen window, endeavoured in every way to force
the shutter open, butwithout success. There was no slit through which a knife
could bepassed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges,
butthey were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry. “Hum!”said
he, scratching his chin in some perplexity, “my theory certainlypresents some
difficulties. No one could pass these shutters if theywere bolted. Well, we
shall see if the inside throws any light upon thematter.”A small side door led
into the whitewashed corridor from which thethree bedrooms opened. Holmes
refused to examine the third chamber, sowe passed at once to the second, that in
which Miss Stoner was nowsleeping, and in which her sister had met with her
fate. It was ahomely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace,
afterthe fashion of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stood inone
corner, a narrow white-counterpaned bed in another, and adressing-table on the
left-hand side of the window. These articles,with two small wicker-work chairs,
made up all the furniture in theroom save for a square of Wilton carpet in the
centre. The boards roundand the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten
oak, so oldand discoloured that it may have dated from the original building
ofthe house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat silent,while
his eyes travelled round and round and up and down, taking inevery detail of the
apartment.“Where does that bell communicate with?” he asked at last pointing to
athick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, the tassel actuallylying upon
the pillow.“It goes to the housekeeper’s room.”“It looks newer than the other
things?”“Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago.”“Your sister asked
for it, I suppose?”“No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get
what wewanted for ourselves.”“Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a
bell-pull there. Youwill excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as
to thisfloor.” He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in his handand
crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining minutely the cracksbetween the
boards. Then he did the same with the wood-work with whichthe chamber was
panelled. Finally he walked over to the bed and spentsome time in staring at it
and in running his eye up and down the wall.Finally he took the bell-rope in his
hand and gave it a brisk tug.“Why, it’s a dummy,” said he.“Won’t it ring?”“No,
it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. Youcan see now that
it is fastened to a hook just above where the littleopening for the ventilator
is.”“How very absurd! I never noticed that before.”“Very strange!” muttered
Holmes, pulling at the rope. “There are one ortwo very singular points about
this room. For example, what a fool abuilder must be to open a ventilator into
another room, when, with thesame trouble, he might have communicated with the
outside air!”“That is also quite modern,” said the lady.“Done about the same
time as the bell-rope?” remarked Holmes.“Yes, there were several little changes
carried out about that time.”“They seem to have been of a most interesting
character—dummybell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate. With
yourpermission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into theinner
apartment.”Dr. Grimesby Roylott’s chamber was larger than that of
hisstep-daughter, but was as plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a small woodenshelf
full of books, mostly of a technical character, an armchairbeside the bed, a
plain wooden chair against the wall, a round table,and a large iron safe were
the principal things which met the eye.Holmes walked slowly round and examined
each and all of them with thekeenest interest.“What’s in here?” he asked,
tapping the safe.“My stepfather’s business papers.”“Oh! you have seen inside,
then?”“Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers.”“There
isn’t a cat in it, for example?”“No. What a strange idea!”“Well, look at this!”
He took up a small saucer of milk which stood onthe top of it.“No; we don’t keep
a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon.”“Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah
is just a big cat, and yet asaucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying
its wants, I daresay.There is one point which I should wish to determine.” He
squatted downin front of the wooden chair and examined the seat of it with
thegreatest attention.“Thank you. That is quite settled,” said he, rising and
putting hislens in his pocket. “Hullo! Here is something interesting!”The object
which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on onecorner of the bed. The
lash, however, was curled upon itself and tiedso as to make a loop of
whipcord.“What do you make of that, Watson?”“It’s a common enough lash. But I
don’t know why it should be tied.”“That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me!
it’s a wicked world, andwhen a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the
worst of all. Ithink that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with
yourpermission we shall walk out upon the lawn.”I had never seen my friend’s
face so grim or his brow so dark as it waswhen we turned from the scene of this
investigation. We had walkedseveral times up and down the lawn, neither Miss
Stoner nor myselfliking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused himself
from hisreverie.“It is very essential, Miss Stoner,” said he, “that you
shouldabsolutely follow my advice in every respect.”“I shall most certainly do
so.”“The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Your life may dependupon your
compliance.”“I assure you that I am in your hands.”“In the first place, both my
friend and I must spend the night in yourroom.”Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at
him in astonishment.“Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is
the villageinn over there?”“Yes, that is the Crown.”“Very good. Your windows
would be visible from there?”“Certainly.”“You must confine yourself to your
room, on pretence of a headache,when your stepfather comes back. Then when you
hear him retire for thenight, you must open the shutters of your window, undo
the hasp, putyour lamp there as a signal to us, and then withdraw quietly
witheverything which you are likely to want into the room which you used
tooccupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you could managethere
for one night.”“Oh, yes, easily.”“The rest you will leave in our hands.”“But
what will you do?”“We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall
investigate thecause of this noise which has disturbed you.”“I believe, Mr.
Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,” saidMiss Stoner, laying her
hand upon my companion’s sleeve.“Perhaps I have.”“Then, for pity’s sake, tell me
what was the cause of my sister’sdeath.”“I should prefer to have clearer proofs
before I speak.”“You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, and
if shedied from some sudden fright.”“No, I do not think so. I think that there
was probably some moretangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you
for if Dr.Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain. Good-bye,
andbe brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may rest assuredthat
we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you.”Sherlock Holmes and I
had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom andsitting-room at the Crown Inn. They
were on the upper floor, and fromour window we could command a view of the
avenue gate, and of theinhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw
Dr. GrimesbyRoylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside the little
figureof the lad who drove him. The boy had some slight difficulty in undoingthe
heavy iron gates, and we heard the hoarse roar of the Doctor’svoice and saw the
fury with which he shook his clinched fists at him.The trap drove on, and a few
minutes later we saw a sudden light springup among the trees as the lamp was lit
in one of the sitting-rooms.“Do you know, Watson,” said Holmes as we sat
together in the gatheringdarkness, “I have really some scruples as to taking you
to-night. Thereis a distinct element of danger.”“Can I be of assistance?”“Your
presence might be invaluable.”“Then I shall certainly come.”“It is very kind of
you.”“You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these rooms thanwas
visible to me.”“No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imagine
thatyou saw all that I did.”“I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and
what purpose thatcould answer I confess is more than I can imagine.”“You saw the
ventilator, too?”“Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing
to have asmall opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat couldhardly
pass through.”“I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to
StokeMoran.”“My dear Holmes!”“Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she
said that her sistercould smell Dr. Roylott’s cigar. Now, of course that
suggested at oncethat there must be a communication between the two rooms. It
could onlybe a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at the
coroner’sinquiry. I deduced a ventilator.”“But what harm can there be in
that?”“Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilatoris
made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Doesnot that strike
you?”“I cannot as yet see any connection.”“Did you observe anything very
peculiar about that bed?”“No.”“It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a
bed fastened like thatbefore?”“I cannot say that I have.”“The lady could not
move her bed. It must always be in the samerelative position to the ventilator
and to the rope—or so we may callit, since it was clearly never meant for a
bell-pull.”“Holmes,” I cried, “I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. We
areonly just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime.”“Subtle enough
and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he isthe first of criminals. He
has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer andPritchard were among the heads of
their profession. This man strikeseven deeper, but I think, Watson, that we
shall be able to strikedeeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the
night isover; for goodness’ sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our mindsfor
a few hours to something more cheerful.”About nine o’clock the light among the
trees was extinguished, and allwas dark in the direction of the Manor House. Two
hours passed slowlyaway, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of eleven, a
single brightlight shone out right in front of us.“That is our signal,” said
Holmes, springing to his feet; “it comesfrom the middle window.”As we passed out
he exchanged a few words with the landlord, explainingthat we were going on a
late visit to an acquaintance, and that it waspossible that we might spend the
night there. A moment later we wereout on the dark road, a chill wind blowing in
our faces, and one yellowlight twinkling in front of us through the gloom to
guide us on oursombre errand.There was little difficulty in entering the
grounds, for unrepairedbreaches gaped in the old park wall. Making our way among
the trees, wereached the lawn, crossed it, and were about to enter through
thewindow when out from a clump of laurel bushes there darted what seemedto be a
hideous and distorted child, who threw itself upon the grasswith writhing limbs
and then ran swiftly across the lawn into thedarkness.“My God!” I whispered;
“did you see it?”Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed
like a viceupon my wrist in his agitation. Then he broke into a low laugh and
puthis lips to my ear.“It is a nice household,” he murmured. “That is the
baboon.”I had forgotten the strange pets which the Doctor affected. There was
acheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at anymoment. I
confess that I felt easier in my mind when, after followingHolmes’ example and
slipping off my shoes, I found myself inside thebedroom. My companion
noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the lamponto the table, and cast his eyes
round the room. All was as we hadseen it in the daytime. Then creeping up to me
and making a trumpet ofhis hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently that
it was all thatI could do to distinguish the words:“The least sound would be
fatal to our plans.”I nodded to show that I had heard.“We must sit without
light. He would see it through the ventilator.”I nodded again.“Do not go asleep;
your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistolready in case we should need
it. I will sit on the side of the bed, andyou in that chair.”I took out my
revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.Holmes had brought up a long
thin cane, and this he placed upon the bedbeside him. By it he laid the box of
matches and the stump of a candle.Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left
in darkness.How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a
sound,not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my companion
satopen-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same state of nervoustension in
which I was myself. The shutters cut off the least ray oflight, and we waited in
absolute darkness.From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once
at ourvery window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that the cheetahwas
indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear the deep tones of theparish clock,
which boomed out every quarter of an hour. How long theyseemed, those quarters!
Twelve struck, and one and two and three, andstill we sat waiting silently for
whatever might befall.Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in
the directionof the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded by
astrong smell of burning oil and heated metal. Someone in the next roomhad lit a
dark-lantern. I heard a gentle sound of movement, and thenall was silent once
more, though the smell grew stronger. For half anhour I sat with straining ears.
Then suddenly another sound becameaudible—a very gentle, soothing sound, like
that of a small jet ofsteam escaping continually from a kettle. The instant that
we heard it,Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously
withhis cane at the bell-pull.“You see it, Watson?” he yelled. “You see it?”But
I saw nothing. At the moment when Holmes struck the light I heard alow, clear
whistle, but the sudden glare flashing into my weary eyesmade it impossible for
me to tell what it was at which my friend lashedso savagely. I could, however,
see that his face was deadly pale andfilled with horror and loathing. He had
ceased to strike and was gazingup at the ventilator when suddenly there broke
from the silence of thenight the most horrible cry to which I have ever
listened. It swelledup louder and louder, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and
anger allmingled in the one dreadful shriek. They say that away down in
thevillage, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry raised thesleepers from
their beds. It struck cold to our hearts, and I stoodgazing at Holmes, and he at
me, until the last echoes of it had diedaway into the silence from which it
rose.“What can it mean?” I gasped.“It means that it is all over,” Holmes
answered. “And perhaps, afterall, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we
will enter Dr.Roylott’s room.”With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way
down the corridor.Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply from
within. Thenhe turned the handle and entered, I at his heels, with the
cockedpistol in my hand.It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table
stood adark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam
oflight upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar. Beside thistable, on the
wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a longgrey dressing-gown, his
bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feetthrust into red heelless Turkish
slippers. Across his lap lay the shortstock with the long lash which we had
noticed during the day. His chinwas cocked upward and his eyes were fixed in a
dreadful, rigid stare atthe corner of the ceiling. Round his brow he had a
peculiar yellowband, with brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly
roundhis head. As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.“The band! the
speckled band!” whispered Holmes.I took a step forward. In an instant his
strange headgear began tomove, and there reared itself from among his hair the
squatdiamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.“It is a swamp
adder!” cried Holmes; “the deadliest snake in India. Hehas died within ten
seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth,recoil upon the violent, and
the schemer falls into the pit which hedigs for another. Let us thrust this
creature back into its den, and wecan then remove Miss Stoner to some place of
shelter and let the countypolice know what has happened.”As he spoke he drew the
dog-whip swiftly from the dead man’s lap, andthrowing the noose round the
reptile’s neck he drew it from its horridperch and, carrying it at arm’s length,
threw it into the iron safe,which he closed upon it.Such are the true facts of
the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of StokeMoran. It is not necessary that I
should prolong a narrative which hasalready run to too great a length by telling
how we broke the sad newsto the terrified girl, how we conveyed her by the
morning train to thecare of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slow process of
officialinquiry came to the conclusion that the doctor met his fate
whileindiscreetly playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I had yetto
learn of the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelledback next day.“I
had,” said he, “come to an entirely erroneous conclusion whichshows, my dear
Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason frominsufficient data. The presence
of the gipsies, and the use of the word‘band,’ which was used by the poor girl,
no doubt, to explain theappearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of by
the light ofher match, were sufficient to put me upon an entirely wrong scent.
Ican only claim the merit that I instantly reconsidered my positionwhen,
however, it became clear to me that whatever danger threatened anoccupant of the
room could not come either from the window or the door.My attention was speedily
drawn, as I have already remarked to you, tothis ventilator, and to the
bell-rope which hung down to the bed. Thediscovery that this was a dummy, and
that the bed was clamped to thefloor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that
the rope was there asa bridge for something passing through the hole and coming
to the bed.The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me, and when I coupled
itwith my knowledge that the doctor was furnished with a supply ofcreatures from
India, I felt that I was probably on the right track.The idea of using a form of
poison which could not possibly bediscovered by any chemical test was just such
a one as would occur to aclever and ruthless man who had had an Eastern
training. The rapiditywith which such a poison would take effect would also,
from his pointof view, be an advantage. It would be a sharp-eyed coroner,
indeed, whocould distinguish the two little dark punctures which would show
wherethe poison fangs had done their work. Then I thought of the whistle.
Ofcourse he must recall the snake before the morning light revealed it tothe
victim. He had trained it, probably by the use of the milk which wesaw, to
return to him when summoned. He would put it through thisventilator at the hour
that he thought best, with the certainty that itwould crawl down the rope and
land on the bed. It might or might notbite the occupant, perhaps she might
escape every night for a week, butsooner or later she must fall a victim.“I had
come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room. Aninspection of
his chair showed me that he had been in the habit ofstanding on it, which of
course would be necessary in order that heshould reach the ventilator. The sight
of the safe, the saucer of milk,and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally
dispel any doubts whichmay have remained. The metallic clang heard by Miss
Stoner wasobviously caused by her stepfather hastily closing the door of his
safeupon its terrible occupant. Having once made up my mind, you know thesteps
which I took in order to put the matter to the proof. I heard thecreature hiss
as I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly litthe light and attacked
it.”“With the result of driving it through the ventilator.”“And also with the
result of causing it to turn upon its master at theother side. Some of the blows
of my cane came home and roused itssnakish temper, so that it flew upon the
first person it saw. In thisway I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr.
Grimesby Roylott’sdeath, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very
heavily upon myconscience.”IX. THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER’S THUMBOf all the
problems which have been submitted to my friend, Mr.Sherlock Holmes, for
solution during the years of our intimacy, therewere only two which I was the
means of introducing to his notice—thatof Mr. Hatherley’s thumb, and that of
Colonel Warburton’s madness. Ofthese the latter may have afforded a finer field
for an acute andoriginal observer, but the other was so strange in its inception
and sodramatic in its details that it may be the more worthy of being placedupon
record, even if it gave my friend fewer openings for thosedeductive methods of
reasoning by which he achieved such remarkableresults. The story has, I believe,
been told more than once in thenewspapers, but, like all such narratives, its
effect is much lessstriking when set forth _en bloc_ in a single half-column of
print thanwhen the facts slowly evolve before your own eyes, and the
mysteryclears gradually away as each new discovery furnishes a step whichleads
on to the complete truth. At the time the circumstances made adeep impression
upon me, and the lapse of two years has hardly servedto weaken the effect.It was
in the summer of ’89, not long after my marriage, that theevents occurred which
I am now about to summarise. I had returned tocivil practice and had finally
abandoned Holmes in his Baker Streetrooms, although I continually visited him
and occasionally evenpersuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to
come and visitus. My practice had steadily increased, and as I happened to live
at novery great distance from Paddington Station, I got a few patients fromamong
the officials. One of these, whom I had cured of a painful andlingering disease,
was never weary of advertising my virtues and ofendeavouring to send me on every
sufferer over whom he might have anyinfluence.One morning, at a little before
seven o’clock, I was awakened by themaid tapping at the door to announce that
two men had come fromPaddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I
dressedhurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases were
seldomtrivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended, my old ally, theguard,
came out of the room and closed the door tightly behind him.“I’ve got him here,”
he whispered, jerking his thumb over his shoulder;“he’s all right.”“What is it,
then?” I asked, for his manner suggested that it was somestrange creature which
he had caged up in my room.“It’s a new patient,” he whispered. “I thought I’d
bring him roundmyself; then he couldn’t slip away. There he is, all safe and
sound. Imust go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the same as you.” And offhe
went, this trusty tout, without even giving me time to thank him.I entered my
consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by the table.He was quietly dressed
in a suit of heather tweed with a soft cloth capwhich he had laid down upon my
books. Round one of his hands he had ahandkerchief wrapped, which was mottled
all over with bloodstains. Hewas young, not more than five-and-twenty, I should
say, with a strong,masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale and gave me the
impressionof a man who was suffering from some strong agitation, which it
tookall his strength of mind to control.“I am sorry to knock you up so early,
Doctor,” said he, “but I have hada very serious accident during the night. I
came in by train thismorning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I might
find adoctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here. I gave the maid
acard, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table.”I took it up and
glanced at it. “Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulicengineer, 16A, Victoria Street
(3rd floor).” That was the name, style,and abode of my morning visitor. “I
regret that I have kept youwaiting,” said I, sitting down in my library-chair.
“You are fresh froma night journey, I understand, which is in itself a
monotonousoccupation.”“Oh, my night could not be called monotonous,” said he,
and laughed. Helaughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in
hischair and shaking his sides. All my medical instincts rose up againstthat
laugh.“Stop it!” I cried; “pull yourself together!” and I poured out somewater
from a caraffe.It was useless, however. He was off in one of those
hystericaloutbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis
isover and gone. Presently he came to himself once more, very weary
andpale-looking.“I have been making a fool of myself,” he gasped.“Not at all.
Drink this.” I dashed some brandy into the water, and thecolour began to come
back to his bloodless cheeks.“That’s better!” said he. “And now, Doctor, perhaps
you would kindlyattend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumb used
to be.”He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even
myhardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four protrudingfingers and
a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb should havebeen. It had been hacked
or torn right out from the roots.“Good heavens!” I cried, “this is a terrible
injury. It must have bledconsiderably.”“Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done,
and I think that I must havebeen senseless for a long time. When I came to I
found that it wasstill bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very
tightly roundthe wrist and braced it up with a twig.”“Excellent! You should have
been a surgeon.”“It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my
ownprovince.”“This has been done,” said I, examining the wound, “by a very heavy
andsharp instrument.”“A thing like a cleaver,” said he.“An accident, I
presume?”“By no means.”“What! a murderous attack?”“Very murderous indeed.”“You
horrify me.”I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally covered
itover with cotton wadding and carbolised bandages. He lay back withoutwincing,
though he bit his lip from time to time.“How is that?” I asked when I had
finished.“Capital! Between your brandy and your bandage, I feel a new man. I
wasvery weak, but I have had a good deal to go through.”“Perhaps you had better
not speak of the matter. It is evidently tryingto your nerves.”“Oh, no, not now.
I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but,between ourselves, if it were
not for the convincing evidence of thiswound of mine, I should be surprised if
they believed my statement, forit is a very extraordinary one, and I have not
much in the way of proofwith which to back it up; and, even if they believe me,
the clues whichI can give them are so vague that it is a question whether
justice willbe done.”“Ha!” cried I, “if it is anything in the nature of a
problem which youdesire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come
to myfriend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the official police.”“Oh, I
have heard of that fellow,” answered my visitor, “and I shouldbe very glad if he
would take the matter up, though of course I mustuse the official police as
well. Would you give me an introduction tohim?”“I’ll do better. I’ll take you
round to him myself.”“I should be immensely obliged to you.”“We’ll call a cab
and go together. We shall just be in time to have alittle breakfast with him. Do
you feel equal to it?”“Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my
story.”“Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in aninstant.”
I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly to my wife,and in five minutes
was inside a hansom, driving with my newacquaintance to Baker Street.Sherlock
Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his sitting-room inhis dressing-gown,
reading the agony column of _The Times_ and smokinghis before-breakfast pipe,
which was composed of all the plugs anddottles left from his smokes of the day
before, all carefully dried andcollected on the corner of the mantelpiece. He
received us in hisquietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers and eggs, and
joined usin a hearty meal. When it was concluded he settled our new
acquaintanceupon the sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass
ofbrandy and water within his reach.“It is easy to see that your experience has
been no common one, Mr.Hatherley,” said he. “Pray, lie down there and make
yourself absolutelyat home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired
and keep upyour strength with a little stimulant.”“Thank you,” said my patient,
“but I have felt another man since thedoctor bandaged me, and I think that your
breakfast has completed thecure. I shall take up as little of your valuable time
as possible, so Ishall start at once upon my peculiar experiences.”Holmes sat in
his big armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded expressionwhich veiled his keen
and eager nature, while I sat opposite to him,and we listened in silence to the
strange story which our visitordetailed to us.“You must know,” said he, “that I
am an orphan and a bachelor, residingalone in lodgings in London. By profession
I am a hydraulic engineer,and I have had considerable experience of my work
during the sevenyears that I was apprenticed to Venner & Matheson, the
well-known firm,of Greenwich. Two years ago, having served my time, and having
alsocome into a fair sum of money through my poor father’s death, Idetermined to
start in business for myself and took professionalchambers in Victoria Street.“I
suppose that everyone finds his first independent start in businessa dreary
experience. To me it has been exceptionally so. During twoyears I have had three
consultations and one small job, and that isabsolutely all that my profession
has brought me. My gross takingsamount to £ 27 10_s_. Every day, from nine in
the morning until four inthe afternoon, I waited in my little den, until at last
my heart beganto sink, and I came to believe that I should never have any
practice atall.“Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving the
office, myclerk entered to say there was a gentleman waiting who wished to see
meupon business. He brought up a card, too, with the name of ‘ColonelLysander
Stark’ engraved upon it. Close at his heels came the colonelhimself, a man
rather over the middle size, but of an exceedingthinness. I do not think that I
have ever seen so thin a man. His wholeface sharpened away into nose and chin,
and the skin of his cheeks wasdrawn quite tense over his outstanding bones. Yet
this emaciationseemed to be his natural habit, and due to no disease, for his
eye wasbright, his step brisk, and his bearing assured. He was plainly butneatly
dressed, and his age, I should judge, would be nearer forty thanthirty.“‘Mr.
Hatherley?’ said he, with something of a German accent. ‘You havebeen
recommended to me, Mr. Hatherley, as being a man who is not onlyproficient in
his profession but is also discreet and capable ofpreserving a secret.’“I bowed,
feeling as flattered as any young man would at such anaddress. ‘May I ask who it
was who gave me so good a character?’“‘Well, perhaps it is better that I should
not tell you that just atthis moment. I have it from the same source that you
are both an orphanand a bachelor and are residing alone in London.’“‘That is
quite correct,’ I answered; ‘but you will excuse me if I saythat I cannot see
how all this bears upon my professionalqualifications. I understand that it was
on a professional matter thatyou wished to speak to me?’“‘Undoubtedly so. But
you will find that all I say is really to thepoint. I have a professional
commission for you, but absolute secrecyis quite essential—absolute secrecy, you
understand, and of course wemay expect that more from a man who is alone than
from one who lives inthe bosom of his family.’“‘If I promise to keep a secret,’
said I, ‘you may absolutely dependupon my doing so.’“He looked very hard at me
as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I hadnever seen so suspicious and
questioning an eye.“‘Do you promise, then?’ said he at last.“‘Yes, I
promise.’“‘Absolute and complete silence before, during, and after? No
referenceto the matter at all, either in word or writing?’“‘I have already given
you my word.’“‘Very good.’ He suddenly sprang up, and darting like lightning
acrossthe room he flung open the door. The passage outside was empty.“‘That’s
all right,’ said he, coming back. ‘I know that clerks aresometimes curious as to
their master’s affairs. Now we can talk insafety.’ He drew up his chair very
close to mine and began to stare atme again with the same questioning and
thoughtful look.“A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to fear had begun
torise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless man. Even mydread of
losing a client could not restrain me from showing myimpatience.“‘I beg that you
will state your business, sir,’ said I; ‘my time is ofvalue.’ Heaven forgive me
for that last sentence, but the words came tomy lips.“‘How would fifty guineas
for a night’s work suit you?’ he asked.“‘Most admirably.’“‘I say a night’s work,
but an hour’s would be nearer the mark. Isimply want your opinion about a
hydraulic stamping machine which hasgot out of gear. If you show us what is
wrong we shall soon set itright ourselves. What do you think of such a
commission as that?’“‘The work appears to be light and the pay
munificent.’“‘Precisely so. We shall want you to come to-night by the last
train.’“‘Where to?’“‘To Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the
borders ofOxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading. There is a train
fromPaddington which would bring you there at about 11:15.’“‘Very good.’“‘I
shall come down in a carriage to meet you.’“‘There is a drive, then?’“‘Yes, our
little place is quite out in the country. It is a good sevenmiles from Eyford
Station.’“‘Then we can hardly get there before midnight. I suppose there wouldbe
no chance of a train back. I should be compelled to stop the night.’“‘Yes, we
could easily give you a shake-down.’“‘That is very awkward. Could I not come at
some more convenient hour?’“‘We have judged it best that you should come late.
It is to recompenseyou for any inconvenience that we are paying to you, a young
andunknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the very heads ofyour
profession. Still, of course, if you would like to draw out of thebusiness,
there is plenty of time to do so.’“I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how
very useful they would beto me. ‘Not at all,’ said I, ‘I shall be very happy to
accommodatemyself to your wishes. I should like, however, to understand a
littlemore clearly what it is that you wish me to do.’“‘Quite so. It is very
natural that the pledge of secrecy which we haveexacted from you should have
aroused your curiosity. I have no wish tocommit you to anything without your
having it all laid before you. Isuppose that we are absolutely safe from
eavesdroppers?’“‘Entirely.’“‘Then the matter stands thus. You are probably aware
thatfuller’s-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only found in oneor two
places in England?’“‘I have heard so.’“‘Some little time ago I bought a small
place—a very small place—withinten miles of Reading. I was fortunate enough to
discover that there wasa deposit of fuller’s-earth in one of my fields. On
examining it,however, I found that this deposit was a comparatively small one,
andthat it formed a link between two very much larger ones upon the rightand
left—both of them, however, in the grounds of my neighbours. Thesegood people
were absolutely ignorant that their land contained thatwhich was quite as
valuable as a gold-mine. Naturally, it was to myinterest to buy their land
before they discovered its true value, butunfortunately I had no capital by
which I could do this. I took a fewof my friends into the secret, however, and
they suggested that weshould quietly and secretly work our own little deposit
and that inthis way we should earn the money which would enable us to buy
theneighbouring fields. This we have now been doing for some time, and inorder
to help us in our operations we erected a hydraulic press. Thispress, as I have
already explained, has got out of order, and we wishyour advice upon the
subject. We guard our secret very jealously,however, and if it once became known
that we had hydraulic engineerscoming to our little house, it would soon rouse
inquiry, and then, ifthe facts came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of
getting thesefields and carrying out our plans. That is why I have made you
promiseme that you will not tell a human being that you are going to
Eyfordto-night. I hope that I make it all plain?’“‘I quite follow you,’ said I.
‘The only point which I could not quiteunderstand was what use you could make of
a hydraulic press inexcavating fuller’s-earth, which, as I understand, is dug
out likegravel from a pit.’“‘Ah!’ said he carelessly, ‘we have our own process.
We compress theearth into bricks, so as to remove them without revealing what
theyare. But that is a mere detail. I have taken you fully into myconfidence
now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have shown you how I trust you.’He rose as he spoke.
‘I shall expect you, then, at Eyford at 11:15.’“‘I shall certainly be
there.’“‘And not a word to a soul.’ He looked at me with a last long,questioning
gaze, and then, pressing my hand in a cold, dank grasp, hehurried from the
room.“Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was very
muchastonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commission which hadbeen
intrusted to me. On the one hand, of course, I was glad, for thefee was at least
tenfold what I should have asked had I set a priceupon my own services, and it
was possible that this order might lead toother ones. On the other hand, the
face and manner of my patron hadmade an unpleasant impression upon me, and I
could not think that hisexplanation of the fuller’s-earth was sufficient to
explain thenecessity for my coming at midnight, and his extreme anxiety lest
Ishould tell anyone of my errand. However, I threw all fears to thewinds, ate a
hearty supper, drove to Paddington, and started off,having obeyed to the letter
the injunction as to holding my tongue.“At Reading I had to change not only my
carriage but my station.However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and
I reached thelittle dim-lit station after eleven o’clock. I was the only
passengerwho got out there, and there was no one upon the platform save a
singlesleepy porter with a lantern. As I passed out through the wicket
gate,however, I found my acquaintance of the morning waiting in the shadowupon
the other side. Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried meinto a carriage,
the door of which was standing open. He drew up thewindows on either side,
tapped on the wood-work, and away we went asfast as the horse could go.”“One
horse?” interjected Holmes.“Yes, only one.”“Did you observe the colour?”“Yes, I
saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into thecarriage. It was a
chestnut.”“Tired-looking or fresh?”“Oh, fresh and glossy.”“Thank you. I am sorry
to have interrupted you. Pray continue your mostinteresting statement.”“Away we
went then, and we drove for at least an hour. Colonel LysanderStark had said
that it was only seven miles, but I should think, fromthe rate that we seemed to
go, and from the time that we took, that itmust have been nearer twelve. He sat
at my side in silence all thetime, and I was aware, more than once when I
glanced in his direction,that he was looking at me with great intensity. The
country roads seemto be not very good in that part of the world, for we lurched
andjolted terribly. I tried to look out of the windows to see something ofwhere
we were, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could makeout nothing save
the occasional bright blur of a passing light. Now andthen I hazarded some
remark to break the monotony of the journey, butthe colonel answered only in
monosyllables, and the conversation soonflagged. At last, however, the bumping
of the road was exchanged forthe crisp smoothness of a gravel-drive, and the
carriage came to astand. Colonel Lysander Stark sprang out, and, as I followed
after him,pulled me swiftly into a porch which gaped in front of us. We
stepped,as it were, right out of the carriage and into the hall, so that Ifailed
to catch the most fleeting glance of the front of the house. Theinstant that I
had crossed the threshold the door slammed heavilybehind us, and I heard faintly
the rattle of the wheels as the carriagedrove away.“It was pitch dark inside the
house, and the colonel fumbled aboutlooking for matches and muttering under his
breath. Suddenly a dooropened at the other end of the passage, and a long,
golden bar of lightshot out in our direction. It grew broader, and a woman
appeared with alamp in her hand, which she held above her head, pushing her
faceforward and peering at us. I could see that she was pretty, and fromthe
gloss with which the light shone upon her dark dress I knew that itwas a rich
material. She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in atone as though asking a
question, and when my companion answered in agruff monosyllable she gave such a
start that the lamp nearly fell fromher hand. Colonel Stark went up to her,
whispered something in her ear,and then, pushing her back into the room from
whence she had come, hewalked towards me again with the lamp in his
hand.“‘Perhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room for a
fewminutes,’ said he, throwing open another door. It was a quiet, little,plainly
furnished room, with a round table in the centre, on whichseveral German books
were scattered. Colonel Stark laid down the lampon the top of a harmonium beside
the door. ‘I shall not keep youwaiting an instant,’ said he, and vanished into
the darkness.“I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my
ignorance ofGerman I could see that two of them were treatises on science,
theothers being volumes of poetry. Then I walked across to the window,hoping
that I might catch some glimpse of the country-side, but an oakshutter, heavily
barred, was folded across it. It was a wonderfullysilent house. There was an old
clock ticking loudly somewhere in thepassage, but otherwise everything was
deadly still. A vague feeling ofuneasiness began to steal over me. Who were
these German people, andwhat were they doing living in this strange,
out-of-the-way place? Andwhere was the place? I was ten miles or so from Eyford,
that was all Iknew, but whether north, south, east, or west I had no idea. For
thatmatter, Reading, and possibly other large towns, were within thatradius, so
the place might not be so secluded, after all. Yet it wasquite certain, from the
absolute stillness, that we were in thecountry. I paced up and down the room,
humming a tune under my breathto keep up my spirits and feeling that I was
thoroughly earning myfifty-guinea fee.“Suddenly, without any preliminary sound
in the midst of the utterstillness, the door of my room swung slowly open. The
woman wasstanding in the aperture, the darkness of the hall behind her,
theyellow light from my lamp beating upon her eager and beautiful face. Icould
see at a glance that she was sick with fear, and the sight sent achill to my own
heart. She held up one shaking finger to warn me to besilent, and she shot a few
whispered words of broken English at me, hereyes glancing back, like those of a
frightened horse, into the gloombehind her.“‘I would go,’ said she, trying hard,
as it seemed to me, to speakcalmly; ‘I would go. I should not stay here. There
is no good for youto do.’“‘But, madam,’ said I, ‘I have not yet done what I came
for. I cannotpossibly leave until I have seen the machine.’“‘It is not worth
your while to wait,’ she went on. ‘You can passthrough the door; no one
hinders.’ And then, seeing that I smiled andshook my head, she suddenly threw
aside her constraint and made a stepforward, with her hands wrung together. ‘For
the love of Heaven!’ shewhispered, ‘get away from here before it is too
late!’“But I am somewhat headstrong by nature, and the more ready to engagein an
affair when there is some obstacle in the way. I thought of myfifty-guinea fee,
of my wearisome journey, and of the unpleasant nightwhich seemed to be before
me. Was it all to go for nothing? Why shouldI slink away without having carried
out my commission, and without thepayment which was my due? This woman might,
for all I knew, be amonomaniac. With a stout bearing, therefore, though her
manner hadshaken me more than I cared to confess, I still shook my head
anddeclared my intention of remaining where I was. She was about to renewher
entreaties when a door slammed overhead, and the sound of severalfootsteps was
heard upon the stairs. She listened for an instant, threwup her hands with a
despairing gesture, and vanished as suddenly and asnoiselessly as she had
come.“The newcomers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a short thick man with
achinchilla beard growing out of the creases of his double chin, who
wasintroduced to me as Mr. Ferguson.“‘This is my secretary and manager,’ said
the colonel. ‘By the way, Iwas under the impression that I left this door shut
just now. I fearthat you have felt the draught.’“‘On the contrary,’ said I, ‘I
opened the door myself because I feltthe room to be a little close.’“He shot one
of his suspicious looks at me. ‘Perhaps we had betterproceed to business, then,’
said he. ‘Mr. Ferguson and I will take youup to see the machine.’“‘I had better
put my hat on, I suppose.’“‘Oh, no, it is in the house.’“‘What, you dig
fuller’s-earth in the house?’“‘No, no. This is only where we compress it. But
never mind that. Allwe wish you to do is to examine the machine and to let us
know what iswrong with it.’“We went upstairs together, the colonel first with
the lamp, the fatmanager and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house,
withcorridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and little low doors,the
thresholds of which were hollowed out by the generations who hadcrossed them.
There were no carpets and no signs of any furniture abovethe ground floor, while
the plaster was peeling off the walls, and thedamp was breaking through in
green, unhealthy blotches. I tried to puton as unconcerned an air as possible,
but I had not forgotten thewarnings of the lady, even though I disregarded them,
and I kept a keeneye upon my two companions. Ferguson appeared to be a morose
and silentman, but I could see from the little that he said that he was at
leasta fellow-countryman.“Colonel Lysander Stark stopped at last before a low
door, which heunlocked. Within was a small, square room, in which the three of
uscould hardly get at one time. Ferguson remained outside, and thecolonel
ushered me in.“‘We are now,’ said he, ‘actually within the hydraulic press, and
itwould be a particularly unpleasant thing for us if anyone were to turnit on.
The ceiling of this small chamber is really the end of thedescending piston, and
it comes down with the force of many tons uponthis metal floor. There are small
lateral columns of water outsidewhich receive the force, and which transmit and
multiply it in themanner which is familiar to you. The machine goes readily
enough, butthere is some stiffness in the working of it, and it has lost a
littleof its force. Perhaps you will have the goodness to look it over and
toshow us how we can set it right.’“I took the lamp from him, and I examined the
machine very thoroughly.It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercising
enormouspressure. When I passed outside, however, and pressed down the
leverswhich controlled it, I knew at once by the whishing sound that therewas a
slight leakage, which allowed a regurgitation of water throughone of the side
cylinders. An examination showed that one of theindia-rubber bands which was
round the head of a driving-rod had shrunkso as not quite to fill the socket
along which it worked. This wasclearly the cause of the loss of power, and I
pointed it out to mycompanions, who followed my remarks very carefully and asked
severalpractical questions as to how they should proceed to set it right. WhenI
had made it clear to them, I returned to the main chamber of themachine and took
a good look at it to satisfy my own curiosity. It wasobvious at a glance that
the story of the fuller’s-earth was the merestfabrication, for it would be
absurd to suppose that so powerful anengine could be designed for so inadequate
a purpose. The walls were ofwood, but the floor consisted of a large iron
trough, and when I cameto examine it I could see a crust of metallic deposit all
over it. Ihad stooped and was scraping at this to see exactly what it was when
Iheard a muttered exclamation in German and saw the cadaverous face ofthe
colonel looking down at me.“‘What are you doing there?’ he asked.“I felt angry
at having been tricked by so elaborate a story as thatwhich he had told me. ‘I
was admiring your fuller’s-earth,’ said I; ‘Ithink that I should be better able
to advise you as to your machine ifI knew what the exact purpose was for which
it was used.’“The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness of
myspeech. His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up in his
greyeyes.“‘Very well,’ said he, ‘you shall know all about the machine.’ He tooka
step backward, slammed the little door, and turned the key in thelock. I rushed
towards it and pulled at the handle, but it was quitesecure, and did not give in
the least to my kicks and shoves. ‘Hullo!’I yelled. ‘Hullo! Colonel! Let me
out!’“And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent my heartinto
my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the swish of theleaking cylinder.
He had set the engine at work. The lamp still stoodupon the floor where I had
placed it when examining the trough. By itslight I saw that the black ceiling
was coming down upon me, slowly,jerkily, but, as none knew better than myself,
with a force which mustwithin a minute grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threw
myself,screaming, against the door, and dragged with my nails at the lock.
Iimplored the colonel to let me out, but the remorseless clanking of thelevers
drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a foot or two above myhead, and with my
hand upraised I could feel its hard, rough surface.Then it flashed through my
mind that the pain of my death would dependvery much upon the position in which
I met it. If I lay on my face theweight would come upon my spine, and I
shuddered to think of thatdreadful snap. Easier the other way, perhaps; and yet,
had I the nerveto lie and look up at that deadly black shadow wavering down upon
me?Already I was unable to stand erect, when my eye caught something
whichbrought a gush of hope back to my heart.“I have said that though the floor
and ceiling were of iron, the wallswere of wood. As I gave a last hurried glance
around, I saw a thin lineof yellow light between two of the boards, which
broadened andbroadened as a small panel was pushed backward. For an instant I
couldhardly believe that here was indeed a door which led away from death.The
next instant I threw myself through, and lay half-fainting upon theother side.
The panel had closed again behind me, but the crash of thelamp, and a few
moments afterwards the clang of the two slabs of metal,told me how narrow had
been my escape.“I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist, and
Ifound myself lying upon the stone floor of a narrow corridor, while awoman bent
over me and tugged at me with her left hand, while she helda candle in her
right. It was the same good friend whose warning I hadso foolishly
rejected.“‘Come! come!’ she cried breathlessly. ‘They will be here in a
moment.They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste the
so-precioustime, but come!’“This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice. I
staggered to myfeet and ran with her along the corridor and down a winding
stair. Thelatter led to another broad passage, and just as we reached it we
heardthe sound of running feet and the shouting of two voices, one answeringthe
other from the floor on which we were and from the one beneath. Myguide stopped
and looked about her like one who is at her wit’s end.Then she threw open a door
which led into a bedroom, through the windowof which the moon was shining
brightly.“‘It is your only chance,’ said she. ‘It is high, but it may be thatyou
can jump it.’“As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of
thepassage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark rushingforward
with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like a butcher’scleaver in the other. I
rushed across the bedroom, flung open thewindow, and looked out. How quiet and
sweet and wholesome the gardenlooked in the moonlight, and it could not be more
than thirty feetdown. I clambered out upon the sill, but I hesitated to jump
until Ishould have heard what passed between my saviour and the ruffian
whopursued me. If she were ill-used, then at any risks I was determined togo
back to her assistance. The thought had hardly flashed through mymind before he
was at the door, pushing his way past her; but she threwher arms round him and
tried to hold him back.“‘Fritz! Fritz!’ she cried in English, ‘remember your
promise after thelast time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent!
Oh, hewill be silent!’“‘You are mad, Elise!’ he shouted, struggling to break
away from her.‘You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, I
say!’He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to the window, cut at me withhis
heavy weapon. I had let myself go, and was hanging by the hands tothe sill, when
his blow fell. I was conscious of a dull pain, my griploosened, and I fell into
the garden below.“I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up
andrushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for I understoodthat I
was far from being out of danger yet. Suddenly, however, as Iran, a deadly
dizziness and sickness came over me. I glanced down at myhand, which was
throbbing painfully, and then, for the first time, sawthat my thumb had been cut
off and that the blood was pouring from mywound. I endeavoured to tie my
handkerchief round it, but there came asudden buzzing in my ears, and next
moment I fell in a dead faint amongthe rose-bushes.“How long I remained
unconscious I cannot tell. It must have been avery long time, for the moon had
sunk, and a bright morning wasbreaking when I came to myself. My clothes were
all sodden with dew,and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded
thumb. Thesmarting of it recalled in an instant all the particulars of my
night’sadventure, and I sprang to my feet with the feeling that I might
hardlyyet be safe from my pursuers. But to my astonishment, when I came tolook
round me, neither house nor garden were to be seen. I had beenlying in an angle
of the hedge close by the high road, and just a littlelower down was a long
building, which proved, upon my approaching it,to be the very station at which I
had arrived upon the previous night.Were it not for the ugly wound upon my hand,
all that had passed duringthose dreadful hours might have been an evil
dream.“Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the morning
train.There would be one to Reading in less than an hour. The same porter wason
duty, I found, as had been there when I arrived. I inquired of himwhether he had
ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark. The name wasstrange to him. Had he
observed a carriage the night before waiting forme? No, he had not. Was there a
police-station anywhere near? There wasone about three miles off.“It was too far
for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I determined towait until I got back to
town before telling my story to the police. Itwas a little past six when I
arrived, so I went first to have my wounddressed, and then the doctor was kind
enough to bring me along here. Iput the case into your hands and shall do
exactly what you advise.”We both sat in silence for some little time after
listening to thisextraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock Holmes pulled down from
theshelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in which he placed
hiscuttings.“Here is an advertisement which will interest you,” said he.
“Itappeared in all the papers about a year ago. Listen to this: ‘Lost, onthe 9th
inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a hydraulicengineer. Left his
lodgings at ten o’clock at night, and has not beenheard of since. Was dressed
in,’ etc., etc. Ha! That represents thelast time that the colonel needed to have
his machine overhauled, Ifancy.”“Good heavens!” cried my patient. “Then that
explains what the girlsaid.”“Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the colonel was
a cool anddesperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing should
standin the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pirates who willleave
no survivor from a captured ship. Well, every moment now isprecious, so if you
feel equal to it we shall go down to Scotland Yardat once as a preliminary to
starting for Eyford.”Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the train
together,bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village. There were
SherlockHolmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector Bradstreet, of Scotland Yard,a
plain-clothes man, and myself. Bradstreet had spread an ordnance mapof the
county out upon the seat and was busy with his compasses drawinga circle with
Eyford for its centre.“There you are,” said he. “That circle is drawn at a
radius of tenmiles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near
thatline. You said ten miles, I think, sir.”“It was an hour’s good drive.”“And
you think that they brought you back all that way when you
wereunconscious?”“They must have done so. I have a confused memory, too, of
having beenlifted and conveyed somewhere.”“What I cannot understand,” said I,
“is why they should have spared youwhen they found you lying fainting in the
garden. Perhaps the villainwas softened by the woman’s entreaties.”“I hardly
think that likely. I never saw a more inexorable face in mylife.”“Oh, we shall
soon clear up all that,” said Bradstreet. “Well, I havedrawn my circle, and I
only wish I knew at what point upon it the folkthat we are in search of are to
be found.”“I think I could lay my finger on it,” said Holmes quietly.“Really,
now!” cried the inspector, “you have formed your opinion!Come, now, we shall see
who agrees with you. I say it is south, for thecountry is more deserted
there.”“And I say east,” said my patient.“I am for west,” remarked the
plain-clothes man. “There are severalquiet little villages up there.”“And I am
for north,” said I, “because there are no hills there, andour friend says that
he did not notice the carriage go up any.”“Come,” cried the inspector, laughing;
“it’s a very pretty diversity ofopinion. We have boxed the compass among us. Who
do you give yourcasting vote to?”“You are all wrong.”“But we can’t all be.”“Oh,
yes, you can. This is my point.” He placed his finger in thecentre of the
circle. “This is where we shall find them.”“But the twelve-mile drive?” gasped
Hatherley.“Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that the
horsewas fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it hadgone
twelve miles over heavy roads?”“Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough,” observed
Bradstreet thoughtfully.“Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature of
this gang.”“None at all,” said Holmes. “They are coiners on a large scale,
andhave used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken the place
ofsilver.”“We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work,” said
theinspector. “They have been turning out half-crowns by the thousand. Weeven
traced them as far as Reading, but could get no farther, for theyhad covered
their traces in a way that showed that they were very oldhands. But now, thanks
to this lucky chance, I think that we have gotthem right enough.”But the
inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not destinedto fall into the
hands of justice. As we rolled into Eyford Station wesaw a gigantic column of
smoke which streamed up from behind a smallclump of trees in the neighbourhood
and hung like an immense ostrichfeather over the landscape.“A house on fire?”
asked Bradstreet as the train steamed off again onits way.“Yes, sir!” said the
station-master.“When did it break out?”“I hear that it was during the night,
sir, but it has got worse, andthe whole place is in a blaze.”“Whose house is
it?”“Dr. Becher’s.”“Tell me,” broke in the engineer, “is Dr. Becher a German,
very thin,with a long, sharp nose?”The station-master laughed heartily. “No,
sir, Dr. Becher is anEnglishman, and there isn’t a man in the parish who has a
better-linedwaistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, as
Iunderstand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if a little goodBerkshire beef
would do him no harm.”The station-master had not finished his speech before we
were allhastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low hill,
andthere was a great widespread whitewashed building in front of us,spouting
fire at every chink and window, while in the garden in frontthree fire-engines
were vainly striving to keep the flames under.“That’s it!” cried Hatherley, in
intense excitement. “There is thegravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes
where I lay. That secondwindow is the one that I jumped from.”“Well, at least,”
said Holmes, “you have had your revenge upon them.There can be no question that
it was your oil-lamp which, when it wascrushed in the press, set fire to the
wooden walls, though no doubtthey were too excited in the chase after you to
observe it at the time.Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of
last night,though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off by
now.”And Holmes’ fears came to be realised, for from that day to this noword has
ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the sinisterGerman, or the morose
Englishman. Early that morning a peasant had meta cart containing several people
and some very bulky boxes drivingrapidly in the direction of Reading, but there
all traces of thefugitives disappeared, and even Holmes’ ingenuity failed ever
todiscover the least clue as to their whereabouts.The firemen had been much
perturbed at the strange arrangements whichthey had found within, and still more
so by discovering a newly severedhuman thumb upon a window-sill of the second
floor. About sunset,however, their efforts were at last successful, and they
subdued theflames, but not before the roof had fallen in, and the whole place
beenreduced to such absolute ruin that, save some twisted cylinders andiron
piping, not a trace remained of the machinery which had cost ourunfortunate
acquaintance so dearly. Large masses of nickel and of tinwere discovered stored
in an out-house, but no coins were to be found,which may have explained the
presence of those bulky boxes which havebeen already referred to.How our
hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden to thespot where he
recovered his senses might have remained forever amystery were it not for the
soft mould, which told us a very plaintale. He had evidently been carried down
by two persons, one of whomhad remarkably small feet and the other unusually
large ones. On thewhole, it was most probable that the silent Englishman, being
less boldor less murderous than his companion, had assisted the woman to bearthe
unconscious man out of the way of danger.“Well,” said our engineer ruefully as
we took our seats to return oncemore to London, “it has been a pretty business
for me! I have lost mythumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I
gained?”“Experience,” said Holmes, laughing. “Indirectly it may be of value,you
know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputation ofbeing
excellent company for the remainder of your existence.”X. THE ADVENTURE OF THE
NOBLE BACHELORThe Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, have
longceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circles in whichthe
unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh scandals have eclipsed it, andtheir more
piquant details have drawn the gossips away from thisfour-year-old drama. As I
have reason to believe, however, that thefull facts have never been revealed to
the general public, and as myfriend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in
clearing the matterup, I feel that no memoir of him would be complete without
some littlesketch of this remarkable episode.It was a few weeks before my own
marriage, during the days when I wasstill sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker
Street, that he came home froman afternoon stroll to find a letter on the table
waiting for him. Ihad remained indoors all day, for the weather had taken a
sudden turnto rain, with high autumnal winds, and the jezail bullet which I
hadbrought back in one of my limbs as a relic of my Afghan campaignthrobbed with
dull persistence. With my body in one easy-chair and mylegs upon another, I had
surrounded myself with a cloud of newspapersuntil at last, saturated with the
news of the day, I tossed them allaside and lay listless, watching the huge
crest and monogram upon theenvelope upon the table and wondering lazily who my
friend’s noblecorrespondent could be.“Here is a very fashionable epistle,” I
remarked as he entered. “Yourmorning letters, if I remember right, were from a
fish-monger and atide-waiter.”“Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of
variety,” heanswered, smiling, “and the humbler are usually the more
interesting.This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call
upona man either to be bored or to lie.”He broke the seal and glanced over the
contents.“Oh, come, it may prove to be something of interest, after all.”“Not
social, then?”“No, distinctly professional.”“And from a noble client?”“One of
the highest in England.”“My dear fellow, I congratulate you.”“I assure you,
Watson, without affectation, that the status of myclient is a matter of less
moment to me than the interest of his case.It is just possible, however, that
that also may not be wanting in thisnew investigation. You have been reading the
papers diligently of late,have you not?”“It looks like it,” said I ruefully,
pointing to a huge bundle in thecorner. “I have had nothing else to do.”“It is
fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. I readnothing except the
criminal news and the agony column. The latter isalways instructive. But if you
have followed recent events so closelyyou must have read about Lord St. Simon
and his wedding?”“Oh, yes, with the deepest interest.”“That is well. The letter
which I hold in my hand is from Lord St.Simon. I will read it to you, and in
return you must turn over thesepapers and let me have whatever bears upon the
matter. This is what hesays: “‘MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—Lord Backwater tells
me that I may place implicit reliance upon your judgment and discretion. I have
determined, therefore, to call upon you and to consult you in reference to the
very painful event which has occurred in connection with my wedding. Mr.
Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, is acting already in the matter, but he assures me
that he sees no objection to your co-operation, and that he even thinks that it
might be of some assistance. I will call at four o’clock in the afternoon, and,
should you have any other engagement at that time, I hope that you will postpone
it, as this matter is of paramount importance. Yours faithfully, “‘ROBERT ST.
SIMON.’“It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and
thenoble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outerside of
his right little finger,” remarked Holmes as he folded up theepistle.“He says
four o’clock. It is three now. He will be here in an hour.”“Then I have just
time, with your assistance, to get clear upon thesubject. Turn over those papers
and arrange the extracts in their orderof time, while I take a glance as to who
our client is.” He picked ared-covered volume from a line of books of reference
beside themantelpiece. “Here he is,” said he, sitting down and flattening it
outupon his knee. “‘Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon, second sonof the
Duke of Balmoral.’ Hum! ‘Arms: Azure, three caltrops in chiefover a fess sable.
Born in 1846.’ He’s forty-one years of age, which ismature for marriage. Was
Under-Secretary for the colonies in a lateadministration. The Duke, his father,
was at one time Secretary forForeign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet blood by
direct descent, andTudor on the distaff side. Ha! Well, there is nothing very
instructivein all this. I think that I must turn to you Watson, for something
moresolid.”“I have very little difficulty in finding what I want,” said I,
“forthe facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me as remarkable. Ifeared
to refer them to you, however, as I knew that you had an inquiryon hand and that
you disliked the intrusion of other matters.”“Oh, you mean the little problem of
the Grosvenor Square furniture van.That is quite cleared up now—though, indeed,
it was obvious from thefirst. Pray give me the results of your newspaper
selections.”“Here is the first notice which I can find. It is in the
personalcolumn of the _Morning Post_, and dates, as you see, some weeks back:‘A
marriage has been arranged,’ it says, ‘and will, if rumour iscorrect, very
shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon, secondson of the Duke of
Balmoral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only daughter ofAloysius Doran. Esq., of San
Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.’ That is all.”“Terse and to the point,” remarked Holmes,
stretching his long, thinlegs towards the fire.“There was a paragraph amplifying
this in one of the society papers ofthe same week. Ah, here it is: ‘There will
soon be a call forprotection in the marriage market, for the present
free-tradeprinciple appears to tell heavily against our home product. One by
onethe management of the noble houses of Great Britain is passing into thehands
of our fair cousins from across the Atlantic. An importantaddition has been made
during the last week to the list of the prizeswhich have been borne away by
these charming invaders. Lord St. Simon,who has shown himself for over twenty
years proof against the littlegod’s arrows, has now definitely announced his
approaching marriagewith Miss Hatty Doran, the fascinating daughter of a
Californiamillionaire. Miss Doran, whose graceful figure and striking
faceattracted much attention at the Westbury House festivities, is an onlychild,
and it is currently reported that her dowry will run toconsiderably over the six
figures, with expectancies for the future. Asit is an open secret that the Duke
of Balmoral has been compelled tosell his pictures within the last few years,
and as Lord St. Simon hasno property of his own save the small estate of
Birchmoor, it isobvious that the Californian heiress is not the only gainer by
analliance which will enable her to make the easy and common transitionfrom a
Republican lady to a British peeress.’”“Anything else?” asked Holmes,
yawning.“Oh, yes; plenty. Then there is another note in the _Morning Post_ tosay
that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it wouldbe at St.
George’s, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen intimatefriends would be
invited, and that the party would return to thefurnished house at Lancaster Gate
which has been taken by Mr. AloysiusDoran. Two days later—that is, on Wednesday
last—there is a curtannouncement that the wedding had taken place, and that the
honeymoonwould be passed at Lord Backwater’s place, near Petersfield. Those
areall the notices which appeared before the disappearance of the bride.”“Before
the what?” asked Holmes with a start.“The vanishing of the lady.”“When did she
vanish, then?”“At the wedding breakfast.”“Indeed. This is more interesting than
it promised to be; quitedramatic, in fact.”“Yes; it struck me as being a little
out of the common.”“They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally
during thehoneymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt as
this.Pray let me have the details.”“I warn you that they are very
incomplete.”“Perhaps we may make them less so.”“Such as they are, they are set
forth in a single article of a morningpaper of yesterday, which I will read to
you. It is headed, ‘SingularOccurrence at a Fashionable Wedding’:“‘The family of
Lord Robert St. Simon has been thrown into the greatestconsternation by the
strange and painful episodes which have takenplace in connection with his
wedding. The ceremony, as shortlyannounced in the papers of yesterday, occurred
on the previous morning;but it is only now that it has been possible to confirm
the strangerumours which have been so persistently floating about. In spite of
theattempts of the friends to hush the matter up, so much public attentionhas
now been drawn to it that no good purpose can be served byaffecting to disregard
what is a common subject for conversation.“‘The ceremony, which was performed at
St. George’s, Hanover Square,was a very quiet one, no one being present save the
father of thebride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the Duchess of Balmoral, Lord
Backwater,Lord Eustace and Lady Clara St. Simon (the younger brother and
sisterof the bridegroom), and Lady Alicia Whittington. The whole partyproceeded
afterwards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at LancasterGate, where breakfast
had been prepared. It appears that some littletrouble was caused by a woman,
whose name has not been ascertained, whoendeavoured to force her way into the
house after the bridal party,alleging that she had some claim upon Lord St.
Simon. It was only aftera painful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by
the butler andthe footman. The bride, who had fortunately entered the house
beforethis unpleasant interruption, had sat down to breakfast with the rest,when
she complained of a sudden indisposition and retired to her room.Her prolonged
absence having caused some comment, her father followedher, but learned from her
maid that she had only come up to her chamberfor an instant, caught up an ulster
and bonnet, and hurried down to thepassage. One of the footmen declared that he
had seen a lady leave thehouse thus apparelled, but had refused to credit that
it was hismistress, believing her to be with the company. On ascertaining
thathis daughter had disappeared, Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction withthe
bridegroom, instantly put themselves in communication with thepolice, and very
energetic inquiries are being made, which willprobably result in a speedy
clearing up of this very singular business.Up to a late hour last night,
however, nothing had transpired as to thewhereabouts of the missing lady. There
are rumours of foul play in thematter, and it is said that the police have
caused the arrest of thewoman who had caused the original disturbance, in the
belief that, fromjealousy or some other motive, she may have been concerned in
thestrange disappearance of the bride.’”“And is that all?”“Only one little item
in another of the morning papers, but it is asuggestive one.”“And it is—”“That
Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, hasactually been
arrested. It appears that she was formerly a _danseuse_at the Allegro, and that
she has known the bridegroom for some years.There are no further particulars,
and the whole case is in your handsnow—so far as it has been set forth in the
public press.”“And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be. I would not
havemissed it for worlds. But there is a ring at the bell, Watson, and asthe
clock makes it a few minutes after four, I have no doubt that thiswill prove to
be our noble client. Do not dream of going, Watson, for Ivery much prefer having
a witness, if only as a check to my ownmemory.”“Lord Robert St. Simon,”
announced our page-boy, throwing open thedoor. A gentleman entered, with a
pleasant, cultured face, high-nosedand pale, with something perhaps of petulance
about the mouth, and withthe steady, well-opened eye of a man whose pleasant lot
it had everbeen to command and to be obeyed. His manner was brisk, and yet
hisgeneral appearance gave an undue impression of age, for he had a
slightforward stoop and a little bend of the knees as he walked. His hair,too,
as he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round theedges and thin
upon the top. As to his dress, it was careful to theverge of foppishness, with
high collar, black frock-coat, whitewaistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-leather
shoes, and light-colouredgaiters. He advanced slowly into the room, turning his
head from leftto right, and swinging in his right hand the cord which held his
goldeneyeglasses.“Good-day, Lord St. Simon,” said Holmes, rising and bowing.
“Pray takethe basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson. Draw
upa little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over.”“A most painful
matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr.Holmes. I have been cut to the
quick. I understand that you havealready managed several delicate cases of this
sort, sir, though Ipresume that they were hardly from the same class of
society.”“No, I am descending.”“I beg pardon.”“My last client of the sort was a
king.”“Oh, really! I had no idea. And which king?”“The King of
Scandinavia.”“What! Had he lost his wife?”“You can understand,” said Holmes
suavely, “that I extend to theaffairs of my other clients the same secrecy which
I promise to you inyours.”“Of course! Very right! very right! I’m sure I beg
pardon. As to my owncase, I am ready to give you any information which may
assist you informing an opinion.”“Thank you. I have already learned all that is
in the public prints,nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correct—this
article, forexample, as to the disappearance of the bride.”Lord St. Simon
glanced over it. “Yes, it is correct, as far as itgoes.”“But it needs a great
deal of supplementing before anyone could offeran opinion. I think that I may
arrive at my facts most directly byquestioning you.”“Pray do so.”“When did you
first meet Miss Hatty Doran?”“In San Francisco, a year ago.”“You were travelling
in the States?”“Yes.”“Did you become engaged then?”“No.”“But you were on a
friendly footing?”“I was amused by her society, and she could see that I was
amused.”“Her father is very rich?”“He is said to be the richest man on the
Pacific slope.”“And how did he make his money?”“In mining. He had nothing a few
years ago. Then he struck gold,invested it, and came up by leaps and
bounds.”“Now, what is your own impression as to the young lady’s—your
wife’scharacter?”The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down
into thefire. “You see, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “my wife was twenty before
herfather became a rich man. During that time she ran free in a miningcamp and
wandered through woods or mountains, so that her education hascome from Nature
rather than from the schoolmaster. She is what we callin England a tomboy, with
a strong nature, wild and free, unfettered byany sort of traditions. She is
impetuous—volcanic, I was about to say.She is swift in making up her mind and
fearless in carrying out herresolutions. On the other hand, I would not have
given her the namewhich I have the honour to bear”—he gave a little stately
cough—“had Inot thought her to be at bottom a noble woman. I believe that she
iscapable of heroic self-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable wouldbe
repugnant to her.”“Have you her photograph?”“I brought this with me.” He opened
a locket and showed us the fullface of a very lovely woman. It was not a
photograph but an ivoryminiature, and the artist had brought out the full effect
of thelustrous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the exquisite mouth.Holmes
gazed long and earnestly at it. Then he closed the locket andhanded it back to
Lord St. Simon.“The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed
youracquaintance?”“Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season.
I mether several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her.”“She
brought, I understand, a considerable dowry?”“A fair dowry. Not more than is
usual in my family.”“And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is
a _faitaccompli_?”“I really have made no inquiries on the subject.”“Very
naturally not. Did you see Miss Doran on the day before thewedding?”“Yes.”“Was
she in good spirits?”“Never better. She kept talking of what we should do in our
futurelives.”“Indeed! That is very interesting. And on the morning of the
wedding?”“She was as bright as possible—at least until after the ceremony.”“And
did you observe any change in her then?”“Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the
first signs that I had everseen that her temper was just a little sharp. The
incident however, wastoo trivial to relate and can have no possible bearing upon
the case.”“Pray let us have it, for all that.”“Oh, it is childish. She dropped
her bouquet as we went towards thevestry. She was passing the front pew at the
time, and it fell overinto the pew. There was a moment’s delay, but the
gentleman in the pewhanded it up to her again, and it did not appear to be the
worse forthe fall. Yet when I spoke to her of the matter, she answered
meabruptly; and in the carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdlyagitated
over this trifling cause.”“Indeed! You say that there was a gentleman in the
pew. Some of thegeneral public were present, then?”“Oh, yes. It is impossible to
exclude them when the church is open.”“This gentleman was not one of your wife’s
friends?”“No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite
acommon-looking person. I hardly noticed his appearance. But really Ithink that
we are wandering rather far from the point.”“Lady St. Simon, then, returned from
the wedding in a less cheerfulframe of mind than she had gone to it. What did
she do on re-enteringher father’s house?”“I saw her in conversation with her
maid.”“And who is her maid?”“Alice is her name. She is an American and came from
California withher.”“A confidential servant?”“A little too much so. It seemed to
me that her mistress allowed her totake great liberties. Still, of course, in
America they look upon thesethings in a different way.”“How long did she speak
to this Alice?”“Oh, a few minutes. I had something else to think of.”“You did
not overhear what they said?”“Lady St. Simon said something about ‘jumping a
claim.’ She wasaccustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she
meant.”“American slang is very expressive sometimes. And what did your wife
dowhen she finished speaking to her maid?”“She walked into the
breakfast-room.”“On your arm?”“No, alone. She was very independent in little
matters like that. Then,after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose
hurriedly,muttered some words of apology, and left the room. She never
cameback.”“But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to
herroom, covered her bride’s dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet,and went
out.”“Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park incompany
with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and who hadalready made a
disturbance at Mr. Doran’s house that morning.”“Ah, yes. I should like a few
particulars as to this young lady, andyour relations to her.”Lord St. Simon
shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows. “We havebeen on a friendly
footing for some years—I may say on a _very_friendly footing. She used to be at
the Allegro. I have not treated herungenerously, and she had no just cause of
complaint against me, butyou know what women are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear
little thing, butexceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to me. She wrote
medreadful letters when she heard that I was about to be married, and, totell
the truth, the reason why I had the marriage celebrated so quietlywas that I
feared lest there might be a scandal in the church. She cameto Mr. Doran’s door
just after we returned, and she endeavoured to pushher way in, uttering very
abusive expressions towards my wife, and eventhreatening her, but I had foreseen
the possibility of something of thesort, and I had two police fellows there in
private clothes, who soonpushed her out again. She was quiet when she saw that
there was no goodin making a row.”“Did your wife hear all this?”“No, thank
goodness, she did not.”“And she was seen walking with this very woman
afterwards?”“Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as
soserious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid someterrible
trap for her.”“Well, it is a possible supposition.”“You think so, too?”“I did
not say a probable one. But you do not yourself look upon thisas likely?”“I do
not think Flora would hurt a fly.”“Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of
characters. Pray what isyour own theory as to what took place?”“Well, really, I
came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I havegiven you all the facts. Since
you ask me, however, I may say that ithas occurred to me as possible that the
excitement of this affair, theconsciousness that she had made so immense a
social stride, had theeffect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my
wife.”“In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?”“Well, really, when I
consider that she has turned her back—I will notsay upon me, but upon so much
that many have aspired to withoutsuccess—I can hardly explain it in any other
fashion.”“Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis,” said
Holmes,smiling. “And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that I have nearly all mydata.
May I ask whether you were seated at the breakfast-table so thatyou could see
out of the window?”“We could see the other side of the road and the Park.”“Quite
so. Then I do not think that I need to detain you longer. Ishall communicate
with you.”“Should you be fortunate enough to solve this problem,” said
ourclient, rising.“I have solved it.”“Eh? What was that?”“I say that I have
solved it.”“Where, then, is my wife?”“That is a detail which I shall speedily
supply.”Lord St. Simon shook his head. “I am afraid that it will take wiserheads
than yours or mine,” he remarked, and bowing in a stately,old-fashioned manner
he departed.“It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by putting it
on alevel with his own,” said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. “I think that Ishall
have a whisky and soda and a cigar after all thiscross-questioning. I had formed
my conclusions as to the case beforeour client came into the room.”“My dear
Holmes!”“I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I
remarkedbefore, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served to
turnmy conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence is occasionallyvery
convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk, to quoteThoreau’s
example.”“But I have heard all that you have heard.”“Without, however, the
knowledge of pre-existing cases which serves meso well. There was a parallel
instance in Aberdeen some years back, andsomething on very much the same lines
at Munich the year after theFranco-Prussian War. It is one of these cases—but,
hullo, here isLestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra tumbler
uponthe sideboard, and there are cigars in the box.”The official detective was
attired in a pea-jacket and cravat, whichgave him a decidedly nautical
appearance, and he carried a black canvasbag in his hand. With a short greeting
he seated himself and lit thecigar which had been offered to him.“What’s up,
then?” asked Holmes with a twinkle in his eye. “You lookdissatisfied.”“And I
feel dissatisfied. It is this infernal St. Simon marriage case.I can make
neither head nor tail of the business.”“Really! You surprise me.”“Who ever heard
of such a mixed affair? Every clue seems to slipthrough my fingers. I have been
at work upon it all day.”“And very wet it seems to have made you,” said Holmes
laying his handupon the arm of the pea-jacket.“Yes, I have been dragging the
Serpentine.”“In Heaven’s name, what for?”“In search of the body of Lady St.
Simon.”Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.“Have you
dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?” he asked.“Why? What do you
mean?”“Because you have just as good a chance of finding this lady in the oneas
in the other.”Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. “I suppose you know
allabout it,” he snarled.“Well, I have only just heard the facts, but my mind is
made up.”“Oh, indeed! Then you think that the Serpentine plays no part in
thematter?”“I think it very unlikely.”“Then perhaps you will kindly explain how
it is that we found this init?” He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto
the floor awedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes and
abride’s wreath and veil, all discoloured and soaked in water. “There,”said he,
putting a new wedding-ring upon the top of the pile. “There isa little nut for
you to crack, Master Holmes.”“Oh, indeed!” said my friend, blowing blue rings
into the air. “Youdragged them from the Serpentine?”“No. They were found
floating near the margin by a park-keeper. Theyhave been identified as her
clothes, and it seemed to me that if theclothes were there the body would not be
far off.”“By the same brilliant reasoning, every man’s body is to be found inthe
neighbourhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you hope to arriveat through
this?”“At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in the disappearance.”“I am
afraid that you will find it difficult.”“Are you, indeed, now?” cried Lestrade
with some bitterness. “I amafraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with
your deductionsand your inferences. You have made two blunders in as many
minutes.This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar.”“And how?”“In the dress is
a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In thecard-case is a note. And here is
the very note.” He slapped it downupon the table in front of him. “Listen to
this: ‘You will see me whenall is ready. Come at once. F. H. M.’ Now my theory
all along has beenthat Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Flora Millar, and that
she,with confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her disappearance.Here,
signed with her initials, is the very note which was no doubtquietly slipped
into her hand at the door and which lured her withintheir reach.”“Very good,
Lestrade,” said Holmes, laughing. “You really are very fineindeed. Let me see
it.” He took up the paper in a listless way, but hisattention instantly became
riveted, and he gave a little cry ofsatisfaction. “This is indeed important,”
said he.“Ha! you find it so?”“Extremely so. I congratulate you warmly.”Lestrade
rose in his triumph and bent his head to look. “Why,” heshrieked, “you’re
looking at the wrong side!”“On the contrary, this is the right side.”“The right
side? You’re mad! Here is the note written in pencil overhere.”“And over here is
what appears to be the fragment of a hotel bill,which interests me
deeply.”“There’s nothing in it. I looked at it before,” said Lestrade.
“‘Oct.4th, rooms 8_s_., breakfast 2_s_. 6_d_., cocktail 1_s_., lunch 2_s_.6_d_.,
glass sherry, 8_d_.’ I see nothing in that.”“Very likely not. It is most
important, all the same. As to the note,it is important also, or at least the
initials are, so I congratulateyou again.”“I’ve wasted time enough,” said
Lestrade, rising. “I believe in hardwork and not in sitting by the fire spinning
fine theories. Good-day,Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of
the matterfirst.” He gathered up the garments, thrust them into the bag, and
madefor the door.“Just one hint to you, Lestrade,” drawled Holmes before his
rivalvanished; “I will tell you the true solution of the matter. Lady St.Simon
is a myth. There is not, and there never has been, any suchperson.”Lestrade
looked sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me, tapped hisforehead three
times, shook his head solemnly, and hurried away.He had hardly shut the door
behind him when Holmes rose to put on hisovercoat. “There is something in what
the fellow says about outdoorwork,” he remarked, “so I think, Watson, that I
must leave you to yourpapers for a little.”It was after five o’clock when
Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had notime to be lonely, for within an hour there
arrived a confectioner’sman with a very large flat box. This he unpacked with
the help of ayouth whom he had brought with him, and presently, to my very
greatastonishment, a quite epicurean little cold supper began to be laid outupon
our humble lodging-house mahogany. There were a couple of brace ofcold woodcock,
a pheasant, a _pâté de foie gras_ pie with a group ofancient and cobwebby
bottles. Having laid out all these luxuries, mytwo visitors vanished away, like
the genii of the Arabian Nights, withno explanation save that the things had
been paid for and were orderedto this address.Just before nine o’clock Sherlock
Holmes stepped briskly into the room.His features were gravely set, but there
was a light in his eye whichmade me think that he had not been disappointed in
his conclusions.“They have laid the supper, then,” he said, rubbing his
hands.“You seem to expect company. They have laid for five.”“Yes, I fancy we may
have some company dropping in,” said he. “I amsurprised that Lord St. Simon has
not already arrived. Ha! I fancy thatI hear his step now upon the stairs.”It was
indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in,dangling his glasses
more vigorously than ever, and with a veryperturbed expression upon his
aristocratic features.“My messenger reached you, then?” asked Holmes.“Yes, and I
confess that the contents startled me beyond measure. Haveyou good authority for
what you say?”“The best possible.”Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed
his hand over his forehead.“What will the Duke say,” he murmured, “when he hears
that one of thefamily has been subjected to such humiliation?”“It is the purest
accident. I cannot allow that there is anyhumiliation.”“Ah, you look on these
things from another standpoint.”“I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can
hardly see how the ladycould have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of
doing it wasundoubtedly to be regretted. Having no mother, she had no one to
adviseher at such a crisis.”“It was a slight, sir, a public slight,” said Lord
St. Simon, tappinghis fingers upon the table.“You must make allowance for this
poor girl, placed in so unprecedenteda position.”“I will make no allowance. I am
very angry indeed, and I have beenshamefully used.”“I think that I heard a
ring,” said Holmes. “Yes, there are steps onthe landing. If I cannot persuade
you to take a lenient view of thematter, Lord St. Simon, I have brought an
advocate here who may be moresuccessful.” He opened the door and ushered in a
lady and gentleman.“Lord St. Simon,” said he “allow me to introduce you to Mr.
and Mrs.Francis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have already met.”At the
sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from his seat andstood very
erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrust into thebreast of his
frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity. The lady hadtaken a quick step
forward and had held out her hand to him, but hestill refused to raise his eyes.
It was as well for his resolution,perhaps, for her pleading face was one which
it was hard to resist.“You’re angry, Robert,” said she. “Well, I guess you have
every causeto be.”“Pray make no apology to me,” said Lord St. Simon
bitterly.“Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I shouldhave
spoken to you before I went; but I was kind of rattled, and fromthe time when I
saw Frank here again I just didn’t know what I wasdoing or saying. I only wonder
I didn’t fall down and do a faint rightthere before the altar.”“Perhaps, Mrs.
Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave theroom while you explain this
matter?”“If I may give an opinion,” remarked the strange gentleman, “we’ve
hadjust a little too much secrecy over this business already. For my part,I
should like all Europe and America to hear the rights of it.” He wasa small,
wiry, sunburnt man, clean-shaven, with a sharp face and alertmanner.“Then I’ll
tell our story right away,” said the lady. “Frank here and Imet in ’84, in
McQuire’s camp, near the Rockies, where Pa was working aclaim. We were engaged
to each other, Frank and I; but then one dayfather struck a rich pocket and made
a pile, while poor Frank here hada claim that petered out and came to nothing.
The richer Pa grew thepoorer was Frank; so at last Pa wouldn’t hear of our
engagement lastingany longer, and he took me away to ’Frisco. Frank wouldn’t
throw up hishand, though; so he followed me there, and he saw me without Pa
knowinganything about it. It would only have made him mad to know, so we
justfixed it all up for ourselves. Frank said that he would go and make hispile,
too, and never come back to claim me until he had as much as Pa.So then I
promised to wait for him to the end of time and pledgedmyself not to marry
anyone else while he lived. ‘Why shouldn’t we bemarried right away, then,’ said
he, ‘and then I will feel sure of you;and I won’t claim to be your husband until
I come back?’ Well, wetalked it over, and he had fixed it all up so nicely, with
a clergymanall ready in waiting, that we just did it right there; and then
Frankwent off to seek his fortune, and I went back to Pa.“The next I heard of
Frank was that he was in Montana, and then he wentprospecting in Arizona, and
then I heard of him from New Mexico. Afterthat came a long newspaper story about
how a miners’ camp had beenattacked by Apache Indians, and there was my Frank’s
name among thekilled. I fainted dead away, and I was very sick for months after.
Pathought I had a decline and took me to half the doctors in ’Frisco. Nota word
of news came for a year and more, so that I never doubted thatFrank was really
dead. Then Lord St. Simon came to ’Frisco, and we cameto London, and a marriage
was arranged, and Pa was very pleased, but Ifelt all the time that no man on
this earth would ever take the placein my heart that had been given to my poor
Frank.“Still, if I had married Lord St. Simon, of course I’d have done myduty by
him. We can’t command our love, but we can our actions. I wentto the altar with
him with the intention to make him just as good awife as it was in me to be. But
you may imagine what I felt when, justas I came to the altar rails, I glanced
back and saw Frank standing andlooking at me out of the first pew. I thought it
was his ghost atfirst; but when I looked again there he was still, with a kind
ofquestion in his eyes, as if to ask me whether I were glad or sorry tosee him.
I wonder I didn’t drop. I know that everything was turninground, and the words
of the clergyman were just like the buzz of a beein my ear. I didn’t know what
to do. Should I stop the service and makea scene in the church? I glanced at him
again, and he seemed to knowwhat I was thinking, for he raised his finger to his
lips to tell me tobe still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece of paper, and I
knew thathe was writing me a note. As I passed his pew on the way out I
droppedmy bouquet over to him, and he slipped the note into my hand when
hereturned me the flowers. It was only a line asking me to join him whenhe made
the sign to me to do so. Of course I never doubted for a momentthat my first
duty was now to him, and I determined to do just whateverhe might direct.“When I
got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, andhad always been his
friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to get afew things packed and my
ulster ready. I know I ought to have spoken toLord St. Simon, but it was
dreadful hard before his mother and allthose great people. I just made up my
mind to run away and explainafterwards. I hadn’t been at the table ten minutes
before I saw Frankout of the window at the other side of the road. He beckoned
to me andthen began walking into the Park. I slipped out, put on my things,
andfollowed him. Some woman came talking something or other about Lord St.Simon
to me—seemed to me from the little I heard as if he had a littlesecret of his
own before marriage also—but I managed to get away fromher and soon overtook
Frank. We got into a cab together, and away wedrove to some lodgings he had
taken in Gordon Square, and that was mytrue wedding after all those years of
waiting. Frank had been aprisoner among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to
’Frisco, found thatI had given him up for dead and had gone to England, followed
me there,and had come upon me at last on the very morning of my second
wedding.”“I saw it in a paper,” explained the American. “It gave the name andthe
church but not where the lady lived.”“Then we had a talk as to what we should
do, and Frank was all foropenness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as
if I shouldlike to vanish away and never see any of them again—just sending a
lineto Pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awful to me tothink of
all those lords and ladies sitting round that breakfast-tableand waiting for me
to come back. So Frank took my wedding-clothes andthings and made a bundle of
them, so that I should not be traced, anddropped them away somewhere where no
one could find them. It is likelythat we should have gone on to Paris to-morrow,
only that this goodgentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round to us this evening, though
how hefound us is more than I can think, and he showed us very clearly andkindly
that I was wrong and that Frank was right, and that we should beputting
ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret. Then he offered togive us a chance
of talking to Lord St. Simon alone, and so we cameright away round to his rooms
at once. Now, Robert, you have heard itall, and I am very sorry if I have given
you pain, and I hope that youdo not think very meanly of me.”Lord St. Simon had
by no means relaxed his rigid attitude, but hadlistened with a frowning brow and
a compressed lip to this longnarrative.“Excuse me,” he said, “but it is not my
custom to discuss my mostintimate personal affairs in this public manner.”“Then
you won’t forgive me? You won’t shake hands before I go?”“Oh, certainly, if it
would give you any pleasure.” He put out his handand coldly grasped that which
she extended to him.“I had hoped,” suggested Holmes, “that you would have joined
us in afriendly supper.”“I think that there you ask a little too much,”
responded his Lordship.“I may be forced to acquiesce in these recent
developments, but I canhardly be expected to make merry over them. I think that
with yourpermission I will now wish you all a very good-night.” He included
usall in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room.“Then I trust that you at
least will honour me with your company,” saidSherlock Holmes. “It is always a
joy to meet an American, Mr. Moulton,for I am one of those who believe that the
folly of a monarch and theblundering of a minister in far-gone years will not
prevent ourchildren from being some day citizens of the same world-wide
countryunder a flag which shall be a quartering of the Union Jack with theStars
and Stripes.”“The case has been an interesting one,” remarked Holmes when
ourvisitors had left us, “because it serves to show very clearly howsimple the
explanation may be of an affair which at first sight seemsto be almost
inexplicable. Nothing could be more natural than thesequence of events as
narrated by this lady, and nothing stranger thanthe result when viewed, for
instance, by Mr. Lestrade of ScotlandYard.”“You were not yourself at fault at
all, then?”“From the first, two facts were very obvious to me, the one that
thelady had been quite willing to undergo the wedding ceremony, the otherthat
she had repented of it within a few minutes of returning home.Obviously
something had occurred during the morning, then, to cause herto change her mind.
What could that something be? She could not havespoken to anyone when she was
out, for she had been in the company ofthe bridegroom. Had she seen someone,
then? If she had, it must besomeone from America because she had spent so short
a time in thiscountry that she could hardly have allowed anyone to acquire so
deep aninfluence over her that the mere sight of him would induce her tochange
her plans so completely. You see we have already arrived, by aprocess of
exclusion, at the idea that she might have seen an American.Then who could this
American be, and why should he possess so muchinfluence over her? It might be a
lover; it might be a husband. Heryoung womanhood had, I knew, been spent in
rough scenes and understrange conditions. So far I had got before I ever heard
Lord St.Simon’s narrative. When he told us of a man in a pew, of the change
inthe bride’s manner, of so transparent a device for obtaining a note asthe
dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to her confidential maid, andof her very
significant allusion to claim-jumping—which in miners’parlance means taking
possession of that which another person has aprior claim to—the whole situation
became absolutely clear. She hadgone off with a man, and the man was either a
lover or was a previoushusband—the chances being in favour of the latter.”“And
how in the world did you find them?”“It might have been difficult, but friend
Lestrade held information inhis hands the value of which he did not himself
know. The initialswere, of course, of the highest importance, but more valuable
still wasit to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of themost
select London hotels.”“How did you deduce the select?”“By the select prices.
Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence for aglass of sherry pointed to one of
the most expensive hotels. There arenot many in London which charge at that
rate. In the second one which Ivisited in Northumberland Avenue, I learned by an
inspection of thebook that Francis H. Moulton, an American gentleman, had left
only theday before, and on looking over the entries against him, I came uponthe
very items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. His letters wereto be
forwarded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither I travelled, and beingfortunate
enough to find the loving couple at home, I ventured to givethem some paternal
advice and to point out to them that it would bebetter in every way that they
should make their position a littleclearer both to the general public and to
Lord St. Simon in particular.I invited them to meet him here, and, as you see, I
made him keep theappointment.”“But with no very good result,” I remarked. “His
conduct was certainlynot very gracious.”“Ah, Watson,” said Holmes, smiling,
“perhaps you would not be verygracious either, if, after all the trouble of
wooing and wedding, youfound yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of
fortune. I thinkthat we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our
starsthat we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position. Drawyour
chair up and hand me my violin, for the only problem we have stillto solve is
how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings.”XI. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL
CORONET“Holmes,” said I as I stood one morning in our bow-window looking downthe
street, “here is a madman coming along. It seems rather sad thathis relatives
should allow him to come out alone.”My friend rose lazily from his armchair and
stood with his hands in thepockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my
shoulder. It was abright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day before
stilllay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun. Downthe
centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumblyband by the
traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges ofthe footpaths it still
lay as white as when it fell. The grey pavementhad been cleaned and scraped, but
was still dangerously slippery, sothat there were fewer passengers than usual.
Indeed, from the directionof the Metropolitan Station no one was coming save the
single gentlemanwhose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.He was a man of
about fifty, tall, portly, and imposing, with amassive, strongly marked face and
a commanding figure. He was dressedin a sombre yet rich style, in black
frock-coat, shining hat, neatbrown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers.
Yet his actions werein absurd contrast to the dignity of his dress and features,
for he wasrunning hard, with occasional little springs, such as a weary man
giveswho is little accustomed to set any tax upon his legs. As he ran hejerked
his hands up and down, waggled his head, and writhed his faceinto the most
extraordinary contortions.“What on earth can be the matter with him?” I asked.
“He is looking upat the numbers of the houses.”“I believe that he is coming
here,” said Holmes, rubbing his hands.“Here?”“Yes; I rather think he is coming
to consult me professionally. I thinkthat I recognise the symptoms. Ha! did I
not tell you?” As he spoke,the man, puffing and blowing, rushed at our door and
pulled at our belluntil the whole house resounded with the clanging.A few
moments later he was in our room, still puffing, stillgesticulating, but with so
fixed a look of grief and despair in hiseyes that our smiles were turned in an
instant to horror and pity. Fora while he could not get his words out, but
swayed his body and pluckedat his hair like one who has been driven to the
extreme limits of hisreason. Then, suddenly springing to his feet, he beat his
head againstthe wall with such force that we both rushed upon him and tore him
awayto the centre of the room. Sherlock Holmes pushed him down into
theeasy-chair and, sitting beside him, patted his hand and chatted withhim in
the easy, soothing tones which he knew so well how to employ.“You have come to
me to tell your story, have you not?” said he. “Youare fatigued with your haste.
Pray wait until you have recoveredyourself, and then I shall be most happy to
look into any littleproblem which you may submit to me.”The man sat for a minute
or more with a heaving chest, fighting againsthis emotion. Then he passed his
handkerchief over his brow, set hislips tight, and turned his face towards
us.“No doubt you think me mad?” said he.“I see that you have had some great
trouble,” responded Holmes.“God knows I have!—a trouble which is enough to
unseat my reason, sosudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have
faced,although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain.Private
affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two comingtogether, and in so
frightful a form, have been enough to shake my verysoul. Besides, it is not I
alone. The very noblest in the land maysuffer unless some way be found out of
this horrible affair.”“Pray compose yourself, sir,” said Holmes, “and let me
have a clearaccount of who you are and what it is that has befallen you.”“My
name,” answered our visitor, “is probably familiar to your ears. Iam Alexander
Holder, of the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, ofThreadneedle Street.”The
name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the senior partnerin the second
largest private banking concern in the City of London.What could have happened,
then, to bring one of the foremost citizensof London to this most pitiable pass?
We waited, all curiosity, untilwith another effort he braced himself to tell his
story.“I feel that time is of value,” said he; “that is why I hastened herewhen
the police inspector suggested that I should secure yourco-operation. I came to
Baker Street by the Underground and hurriedfrom there on foot, for the cabs go
slowly through this snow. That iswhy I was so out of breath, for I am a man who
takes very littleexercise. I feel better now, and I will put the facts before
you asshortly and yet as clearly as I can.“It is, of course, well known to you
that in a successful bankingbusiness as much depends upon our being able to find
remunerativeinvestments for our funds as upon our increasing our connection and
thenumber of our depositors. One of our most lucrative means of laying outmoney
is in the shape of loans, where the security is unimpeachable. Wehave done a
good deal in this direction during the last few years, andthere are many noble
families to whom we have advanced large sums uponthe security of their pictures,
libraries, or plate.“Yesterday morning I was seated in my office at the bank
when a cardwas brought in to me by one of the clerks. I started when I saw
thename, for it was that of none other than—well, perhaps even to you Ihad
better say no more than that it was a name which is a householdword all over the
earth—one of the highest, noblest, most exalted namesin England. I was
overwhelmed by the honour and attempted, when heentered, to say so, but he
plunged at once into business with the airof a man who wishes to hurry quickly
through a disagreeable task.“‘Mr. Holder,’ said he, ‘I have been informed that
you are in the habitof advancing money.’“‘The firm does so when the security is
good.’ I answered.“‘It is absolutely essential to me,’ said he, ‘that I should
have £50,000 at once. I could, of course, borrow so trifling a sum ten timesover
from my friends, but I much prefer to make it a matter of businessand to carry
out that business myself. In my position you can readilyunderstand that it is
unwise to place one’s self under obligations.’“‘For how long, may I ask, do you
want this sum?’ I asked.“‘Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall
then mostcertainly repay what you advance, with whatever interest you think
itright to charge. But it is very essential to me that the money shouldbe paid
at once.’“‘I should be happy to advance it without further parley from my
ownprivate purse,’ said I, ‘were it not that the strain would be rathermore than
it could bear. If, on the other hand, I am to do it in thename of the firm, then
in justice to my partner I must insist that,even in your case, every
businesslike precaution should be taken.’“‘I should much prefer to have it so,’
said he, raising up a square,black morocco case which he had laid beside his
chair. ‘You havedoubtless heard of the Beryl Coronet?’“‘One of the most precious
public possessions of the empire,’ said I.“‘Precisely.’ He opened the case, and
there, imbedded in soft,flesh-coloured velvet, lay the magnificent piece of
jewellery which hehad named. ‘There are thirty-nine enormous beryls,’ said he,
‘and theprice of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimate wouldput
the worth of the coronet at double the sum which I have asked. I amprepared to
leave it with you as my security.’“I took the precious case into my hands and
looked in some perplexityfrom it to my illustrious client.“‘You doubt its
value?’ he asked.“‘Not at all. I only doubt—’“‘The propriety of my leaving it.
You may set your mind at rest aboutthat. I should not dream of doing so were it
not absolutely certainthat I should be able in four days to reclaim it. It is a
pure matterof form. Is the security sufficient?’“‘Ample.’“‘You understand, Mr.
Holder, that I am giving you a strong proof ofthe confidence which I have in
you, founded upon all that I have heardof you. I rely upon you not only to be
discreet and to refrain from allgossip upon the matter but, above all, to
preserve this coronet withevery possible precaution because I need not say that
a great publicscandal would be caused if any harm were to befall it. Any injury
to itwould be almost as serious as its complete loss, for there are noberyls in
the world to match these, and it would be impossible toreplace them. I leave it
with you, however, with every confidence, andI shall call for it in person on
Monday morning.’“Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I said no more
but,calling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over fifty £ 1000 notes.When I
was alone once more, however, with the precious case lying uponthe table in
front of me, I could not but think with some misgivings ofthe immense
responsibility which it entailed upon me. There could be nodoubt that, as it was
a national possession, a horrible scandal wouldensue if any misfortune should
occur to it. I already regretted havingever consented to take charge of it.
However, it was too late to alterthe matter now, so I locked it up in my private
safe and turned oncemore to my work.“When evening came I felt that it would be
an imprudence to leave soprecious a thing in the office behind me. Bankers’
safes had beenforced before now, and why should not mine be? If so, how
terriblewould be the position in which I should find myself! I
determined,therefore, that for the next few days I would always carry the
casebackward and forward with me, so that it might never be really out ofmy
reach. With this intention, I called a cab and drove out to my houseat
Streatham, carrying the jewel with me. I did not breathe freelyuntil I had taken
it upstairs and locked it in the bureau of mydressing-room.“And now a word as to
my household, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you tothoroughly understand the situation.
My groom and my page sleep out ofthe house, and may be set aside altogether. I
have three maid-servantswho have been with me a number of years and whose
absolute reliabilityis quite above suspicion. Another, Lucy Parr, the second
waiting-maid,has only been in my service a few months. She came with an
excellentcharacter, however, and has always given me satisfaction. She is a
verypretty girl and has attracted admirers who have occasionally hung aboutthe
place. That is the only drawback which we have found to her, but webelieve her
to be a thoroughly good girl in every way.“So much for the servants. My family
itself is so small that it willnot take me long to describe it. I am a widower
and have an only son,Arthur. He has been a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmes—a
grievousdisappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself to blame. People tellme
that I have spoiled him. Very likely I have. When my dear wife diedI felt that
he was all I had to love. I could not bear to see the smilefade even for a
moment from his face. I have never denied him a wish.Perhaps it would have been
better for both of us had I been sterner,but I meant it for the best.“It was
naturally my intention that he should succeed me in mybusiness, but he was not
of a business turn. He was wild, wayward, and,to speak the truth, I could not
trust him in the handling of large sumsof money. When he was young he became a
member of an aristocratic club,and there, having charming manners, he was soon
the intimate of anumber of men with long purses and expensive habits. He learned
to playheavily at cards and to squander money on the turf, until he had againand
again to come to me and implore me to give him an advance upon hisallowance,
that he might settle his debts of honour. He tried more thanonce to break away
from the dangerous company which he was keeping, buteach time the influence of
his friend, Sir George Burnwell, was enoughto draw him back again.“And, indeed,
I could not wonder that such a man as Sir George Burnwellshould gain an
influence over him, for he has frequently brought him tomy house, and I have
found myself that I could hardly resist thefascination of his manner. He is
older than Arthur, a man of the worldto his finger-tips, one who had been
everywhere, seen everything, abrilliant talker, and a man of great personal
beauty. Yet when I thinkof him in cold blood, far away from the glamour of his
presence, I amconvinced from his cynical speech and the look which I have caught
inhis eyes that he is one who should be deeply distrusted. So I think,and so,
too, thinks my little Mary, who has a woman’s quick insightinto character.“And
now there is only she to be described. She is my niece; but whenmy brother died
five years ago and left her alone in the world Iadopted her, and have looked
upon her ever since as my daughter. She isa sunbeam in my house—sweet, loving,
beautiful, a wonderful manager andhousekeeper, yet as tender and quiet and
gentle as a woman could be.She is my right hand. I do not know what I could do
without her. Inonly one matter has she ever gone against my wishes. Twice my boy
hasasked her to marry him, for he loves her devotedly, but each time shehas
refused him. I think that if anyone could have drawn him into theright path it
would have been she, and that his marriage might havechanged his whole life; but
now, alas! it is too late—forever too late!“Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people
who live under my roof, and Ishall continue with my miserable story.“When we
were taking coffee in the drawing-room that night afterdinner, I told Arthur and
Mary my experience, and of the precioustreasure which we had under our roof,
suppressing only the name of myclient. Lucy Parr, who had brought in the coffee,
had, I am sure, leftthe room; but I cannot swear that the door was closed. Mary
and Arthurwere much interested and wished to see the famous coronet, but
Ithought it better not to disturb it.“‘Where have you put it?’ asked Arthur.“‘In
my own bureau.’“‘Well, I hope to goodness the house won’t be burgled during
thenight.’ said he.“‘It is locked up,’ I answered.“‘Oh, any old key will fit
that bureau. When I was a youngster I haveopened it myself with the key of the
box-room cupboard.’“He often had a wild way of talking, so that I thought little
of whathe said. He followed me to my room, however, that night with a verygrave
face.“‘Look here, dad,’ said he with his eyes cast down, ‘can you let mehave £
200?’“‘No, I cannot!’ I answered sharply. ‘I have been far too generous withyou
in money matters.’“‘You have been very kind,’ said he, ‘but I must have this
money, orelse I can never show my face inside the club again.’“‘And a very good
thing, too!’ I cried.“‘Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonoured
man,’ said he.‘I could not bear the disgrace. I must raise the money in some
way, andif you will not let me have it, then I must try other means.’“I was very
angry, for this was the third demand during the month. ‘Youshall not have a
farthing from me,’ I cried, on which he bowed and leftthe room without another
word.“When he was gone I unlocked my bureau, made sure that my treasure wassafe,
and locked it again. Then I started to go round the house to seethat all was
secure—a duty which I usually leave to Mary but which Ithought it well to
perform myself that night. As I came down the stairsI saw Mary herself at the
side window of the hall, which she closed andfastened as I approached.“‘Tell me,
dad,’ said she, looking, I thought, a little disturbed, ‘didyou give Lucy, the
maid, leave to go out to-night?’“‘Certainly not.’“‘She came in just now by the
back door. I have no doubt that she hasonly been to the side gate to see
someone, but I think that it ishardly safe and should be stopped.’“‘You must
speak to her in the morning, or I will if you prefer it. Areyou sure that
everything is fastened?’“‘Quite sure, dad.’“‘Then, good-night.’ I kissed her and
went up to my bedroom again,where I was soon asleep.“I am endeavouring to tell
you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may haveany bearing upon the case, but I beg
that you will question me upon anypoint which I do not make clear.”“On the
contrary, your statement is singularly lucid.”“I come to a part of my story now
in which I should wish to beparticularly so. I am not a very heavy sleeper, and
the anxiety in mymind tended, no doubt, to make me even less so than usual.
About two inthe morning, then, I was awakened by some sound in the house. It
hadceased ere I was wide awake, but it had left an impression behind it asthough
a window had gently closed somewhere. I lay listening with allmy ears. Suddenly,
to my horror, there was a distinct sound offootsteps moving softly in the next
room. I slipped out of bed, allpalpitating with fear, and peeped round the
corner of my dressing-roomdoor.“‘Arthur!’ I screamed, ‘you villain! you thief!
How dare you touch thatcoronet?’“The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my
unhappy boy, dressedonly in his shirt and trousers, was standing beside the
light, holdingthe coronet in his hands. He appeared to be wrenching at it, or
bendingit with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from his grasp
andturned as pale as death. I snatched it up and examined it. One of thegold
corners, with three of the beryls in it, was missing.“‘You blackguard!’ I
shouted, beside myself with rage. ‘You havedestroyed it! You have dishonoured me
forever! Where are the jewelswhich you have stolen?’“‘Stolen!’ he cried.“‘Yes,
thief!’ I roared, shaking him by the shoulder.“‘There are none missing. There
cannot be any missing,’ said he.“‘There are three missing. And you know where
they are. Must I call youa liar as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to
tear off anotherpiece?’“‘You have called me names enough,’ said he, ‘I will not
stand it anylonger. I shall not say another word about this business, since
youhave chosen to insult me. I will leave your house in the morning andmake my
own way in the world.’“‘You shall leave it in the hands of the police!’ I cried
half-mad withgrief and rage. ‘I shall have this matter probed to the
bottom.’“‘You shall learn nothing from me,’ said he with a passion such as
Ishould not have thought was in his nature. ‘If you choose to call thepolice,
let the police find what they can.’“By this time the whole house was astir, for
I had raised my voice inmy anger. Mary was the first to rush into my room, and,
at the sight ofthe coronet and of Arthur’s face, she read the whole story and,
with ascream, fell down senseless on the ground. I sent the housemaid for
thepolice and put the investigation into their hands at once. When theinspector
and a constable entered the house, Arthur, who had stoodsullenly with his arms
folded, asked me whether it was my intention tocharge him with theft. I answered
that it had ceased to be a privatematter, but had become a public one, since the
ruined coronet wasnational property. I was determined that the law should have
its way ineverything.“‘At least,’ said he, ‘you will not have me arrested at
once. It wouldbe to your advantage as well as mine if I might leave the house
forfive minutes.’“‘That you may get away, or perhaps that you may conceal what
you havestolen,’ said I. And then, realising the dreadful position in which Iwas
placed, I implored him to remember that not only my honour but thatof one who
was far greater than I was at stake; and that he threatenedto raise a scandal
which would convulse the nation. He might avert itall if he would but tell me
what he had done with the three missingstones.“‘You may as well face the
matter,’ said I; ‘you have been caught inthe act, and no confession could make
your guilt more heinous. If youbut make such reparation as is in your power, by
telling us where theberyls are, all shall be forgiven and forgotten.’“‘Keep your
forgiveness for those who ask for it,’ he answered, turningaway from me with a
sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for any wordsof mine to influence him.
There was but one way for it. I called in theinspector and gave him into
custody. A search was made at once not onlyof his person but of his room and of
every portion of the house wherehe could possibly have concealed the gems; but
no trace of them couldbe found, nor would the wretched boy open his mouth for
all ourpersuasions and our threats. This morning he was removed to a cell, andI,
after going through all the police formalities, have hurried roundto you to
implore you to use your skill in unravelling the matter. Thepolice have openly
confessed that they can at present make nothing ofit. You may go to any expense
which you think necessary. I have alreadyoffered a reward of £ 1000. My God,
what shall I do! I have lost myhonour, my gems, and my son in one night. Oh,
what shall I do!”He put a hand on either side of his head and rocked himself to
and fro,droning to himself like a child whose grief has got beyond
words.Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes, with his brows knittedand
his eyes fixed upon the fire.“Do you receive much company?” he asked.“None save
my partner with his family and an occasional friend ofArthur’s. Sir George
Burnwell has been several times lately. No oneelse, I think.”“Do you go out much
in society?”“Arthur does. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care for
it.”“That is unusual in a young girl.”“She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is
not so very young. She isfour-and-twenty.”“This matter, from what you say, seems
to have been a shock to heralso.”“Terrible! She is even more affected than
I.”“You have neither of you any doubt as to your son’s guilt?”“How can we have
when I saw him with my own eyes with the coronet inhis hands.”“I hardly consider
that a conclusive proof. Was the remainder of thecoronet at all injured?”“Yes,
it was twisted.”“Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to
straightenit?”“God bless you! You are doing what you can for him and for me. But
itis too heavy a task. What was he doing there at all? If his purposewere
innocent, why did he not say so?”“Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he
not invent a lie? Hissilence appears to me to cut both ways. There are several
singularpoints about the case. What did the police think of the noise whichawoke
you from your sleep?”“They considered that it might be caused by Arthur’s
closing hisbedroom door.”“A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam
his door so asto wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance
ofthese gems?”“They are still sounding the planking and probing the furniture in
thehope of finding them.”“Have they thought of looking outside the house?”“Yes,
they have shown extraordinary energy. The whole garden hasalready been minutely
examined.”“Now, my dear sir,” said Holmes, “is it not obvious to you now
thatthis matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or thepolice
were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be asimple case; to me it
seems exceedingly complex. Consider what isinvolved by your theory. You suppose
that your son came down from hisbed, went, at great risk, to your dressing-room,
opened your bureau,took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small
portion of it,went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of
thethirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and thenreturned with
the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposedhimself to the greatest
danger of being discovered. I ask you now, issuch a theory tenable?”“But what
other is there?” cried the banker with a gesture of despair.“If his motives were
innocent, why does he not explain them?”“It is our task to find that out,”
replied Holmes; “so now, if youplease, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham
together, and devotean hour to glancing a little more closely into details.”My
friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition, whichI was eager
enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy were deeplystirred by the story to
which we had listened. I confess that the guiltof the banker’s son appeared to
me to be as obvious as it did to hisunhappy father, but still I had such faith
in Holmes’ judgment that Ifelt that there must be some grounds for hope as long
as he wasdissatisfied with the accepted explanation. He hardly spoke a word
thewhole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with his chin upon hisbreast
and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deepest thought.Our client appeared
to have taken fresh heart at the little glimpse ofhope which had been presented
to him, and he even broke into adesultory chat with me over his business
affairs. A short railwayjourney and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, the
modest residenceof the great financier.Fairbank was a good-sized square house of
white stone, standing back alittle from the road. A double carriage-sweep, with
a snow-clad lawn,stretched down in front to two large iron gates which closed
theentrance. On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which led intoa
narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from the road to thekitchen door,
and forming the tradesmen’s entrance. On the left ran alane which led to the
stables, and was not itself within the grounds atall, being a public, though
little used, thoroughfare. Holmes left usstanding at the door and walked slowly
all round the house, across thefront, down the tradesmen’s path, and so round by
the garden behindinto the stable lane. So long was he that Mr. Holder and I went
intothe dining-room and waited by the fire until he should return. We
weresitting there in silence when the door opened and a young lady came in.She
was rather above the middle height, slim, with dark hair and eyes,which seemed
the darker against the absolute pallor of her skin. I donot think that I have
ever seen such deadly paleness in a woman’s face.Her lips, too, were bloodless,
but her eyes were flushed with crying.As she swept silently into the room she
impressed me with a greatersense of grief than the banker had done in the
morning, and it was themore striking in her as she was evidently a woman of
strong character,with immense capacity for self-restraint. Disregarding my
presence, shewent straight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with
asweet womanly caress.“You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated,
have you not,dad?” she asked.“No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the
bottom.”“But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what woman’s
instinctsare. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be sorry
forhaving acted so harshly.”“Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent?”“Who
knows? Perhaps because he was so angry that you should suspecthim.”“How could I
help suspecting him, when I actually saw him with thecoronet in his hand?”“Oh,
but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take myword for it that
he is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more.It is so dreadful to think
of our dear Arthur in prison!”“I shall never let it drop until the gems are
found—never, Mary! Youraffection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful
consequences to me. Farfrom hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman
down from Londonto inquire more deeply into it.”“This gentleman?” she asked,
facing round to me.“No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round
in thestable lane now.”“The stable lane?” She raised her dark eyebrows. “What
can he hope tofind there? Ah! this, I suppose, is he. I trust, sir, that you
willsucceed in proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousinArthur is
innocent of this crime.”“I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with you, that
we may proveit,” returned Holmes, going back to the mat to knock the snow from
hisshoes. “I believe I have the honour of addressing Miss Mary Holder.Might I
ask you a question or two?”“Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this horrible
affair up.”“You heard nothing yourself last night?”“Nothing, until my uncle here
began to speak loudly. I heard that, andI came down.”“You shut up the windows
and doors the night before. Did you fasten allthe windows?”“Yes.”“Were they all
fastened this morning?”“Yes.”“You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think that
you remarked toyour uncle last night that she had been out to see him?”“Yes, and
she was the girl who waited in the drawing-room, and who mayhave heard uncle’s
remarks about the coronet.”“I see. You infer that she may have gone out to tell
her sweetheart,and that the two may have planned the robbery.”“But what is the
good of all these vague theories,” cried the bankerimpatiently, “when I have
told you that I saw Arthur with the coronetin his hands?”“Wait a little, Mr.
Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl,Miss Holder. You saw her
return by the kitchen door, I presume?”“Yes; when I went to see if the door was
fastened for the night I mether slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the
gloom.”“Do you know him?”“Oh, yes! he is the greengrocer who brings our
vegetables round. Hisname is Francis Prosper.”“He stood,” said Holmes, “to the
left of the door—that is to say,farther up the path than is necessary to reach
the door?”“Yes, he did.”“And he is a man with a wooden leg?”Something like fear
sprang up in the young lady’s expressive blackeyes. “Why, you are like a
magician,” said she. “How do you know that?”She smiled, but there was no
answering smile in Holmes’ thin, eagerface.“I should be very glad now to go
upstairs,” said he. “I shall probablywish to go over the outside of the house
again. Perhaps I had bettertake a look at the lower windows before I go up.”He
walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at thelarge one which
looked from the hall onto the stable lane. This heopened and made a very careful
examination of the sill with hispowerful magnifying lens. “Now we shall go
upstairs,” said he at last.The banker’s dressing-room was a plainly furnished
little chamber, witha grey carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. Holmes
went to thebureau first and looked hard at the lock.“Which key was used to open
it?” he asked.“That which my son himself indicated—that of the cupboard of
thelumber-room.”“Have you it here?”“That is it on the dressing-table.”Sherlock
Holmes took it up and opened the bureau.“It is a noiseless lock,” said he. “It
is no wonder that it did notwake you. This case, I presume, contains the
coronet. We must have alook at it.” He opened the case, and taking out the
diadem he laid itupon the table. It was a magnificent specimen of the jeweller’s
art,and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever seen. At oneside
of the coronet was a cracked edge, where a corner holding threegems had been
torn away.“Now, Mr. Holder,” said Holmes, “here is the corner which
correspondsto that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg that you
willbreak it off.”The banker recoiled in horror. “I should not dream of trying,”
said he.“Then I will.” Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but
withoutresult. “I feel it give a little,” said he; “but, though I
amexceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me all my time tobreak it.
An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think wouldhappen if I did
break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise like apistol shot. Do you tell me
that all this happened within a few yardsof your bed and that you heard nothing
of it?”“I do not know what to think. It is all dark to me.”“But perhaps it may
grow lighter as we go. What do you think, MissHolder?”“I confess that I still
share my uncle’s perplexity.”“Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw
him?”“He had nothing on save only his trousers and shirt.”“Thank you. We have
certainly been favoured with extraordinary luckduring this inquiry, and it will
be entirely our own fault if we do notsucceed in clearing the matter up. With
your permission, Mr. Holder, Ishall now continue my investigations outside.”He
went alone, at his own request, for he explained that anyunnecessary footmarks
might make his task more difficult. For an houror more he was at work, returning
at last with his feet heavy with snowand his features as inscrutable as ever.“I
think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder,”said he; “I can
serve you best by returning to my rooms.”“But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are
they?”“I cannot tell.”The banker wrung his hands. “I shall never see them
again!” he cried.“And my son? You give me hopes?”“My opinion is in no way
altered.”“Then, for God’s sake, what was this dark business which was acted inmy
house last night?”“If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow
morningbetween nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make itclearer.
I understand that you give me _carte blanche_ to act for you,provided only that
I get back the gems, and that you place no limit onthe sum I may draw.”“I would
give my fortune to have them back.”“Very good. I shall look into the matter
between this and then.Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come over
here againbefore evening.”It was obvious to me that my companion’s mind was now
made up about thecase, although what his conclusions were was more than I could
evendimly imagine. Several times during our homeward journey I endeavouredto
sound him upon the point, but he always glided away to some othertopic, until at
last I gave it over in despair. It was not yet threewhen we found ourselves in
our rooms once more. He hurried to hischamber and was down again in a few
minutes dressed as a common loafer.With his collar turned up, his shiny, seedy
coat, his red cravat, andhis worn boots, he was a perfect sample of the class.“I
think that this should do,” said he, glancing into the glass abovethe fireplace.
“I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, but Ifear that it won’t do. I
may be on the trail in this matter, or I maybe following a will-o’-the-wisp, but
I shall soon know which it is. Ihope that I may be back in a few hours.” He cut
a slice of beef fromthe joint upon the sideboard, sandwiched it between two
rounds ofbread, and thrusting this rude meal into his pocket he started off
uponhis expedition.I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in
excellentspirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand. He chucked
itdown into a corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.“I only looked in as I
passed,” said he. “I am going right on.”“Where to?”“Oh, to the other side of the
West End. It may be some time before Iget back. Don’t wait up for me in case I
should be late.”“How are you getting on?”“Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I
have been out to Streatham sinceI saw you last, but I did not call at the house.
It is a very sweetlittle problem, and I would not have missed it for a good
deal.However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get these
disreputableclothes off and return to my highly respectable self.”I could see by
his manner that he had stronger reasons for satisfactionthan his words alone
would imply. His eyes twinkled, and there was evena touch of colour upon his
sallow cheeks. He hastened upstairs, and afew minutes later I heard the slam of
the hall door, which told me thathe was off once more upon his congenial hunt.I
waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so Iretired to my
room. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away fordays and nights on end when
he was hot upon a scent, so that hislateness caused me no surprise. I do not
know at what hour he came in,but when I came down to breakfast in the morning
there he was with acup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the other, as
fresh and trimas possible.“You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson,”
said he, “but youremember that our client has rather an early appointment this
morning.”“Why, it is after nine now,” I answered. “I should not be surprised
ifthat were he. I thought I heard a ring.”It was, indeed, our friend the
financier. I was shocked by the changewhich had come over him, for his face
which was naturally of a broadand massive mould, was now pinched and fallen in,
while his hair seemedto me at least a shade whiter. He entered with a weariness
and lethargywhich was even more painful than his violence of the morning
before,and he dropped heavily into the armchair which I pushed forward forhim.“I
do not know what I have done to be so severely tried,” said he.“Only two days
ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a care inthe world. Now I am left
to a lonely and dishonoured age. One sorrowcomes close upon the heels of
another. My niece, Mary, has desertedme.”“Deserted you?”“Yes. Her bed this
morning had not been slept in, her room was empty,and a note for me lay upon the
hall table. I had said to her lastnight, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she
had married my boy allmight have been well with him. Perhaps it was thoughtless
of me to sayso. It is to that remark that she refers in this note: “‘MY DEAREST
UNCLE,—I feel that I have brought trouble upon you, and that if I had acted
differently this terrible misfortune might never have occurred. I cannot, with
this thought in my mind, ever again be happy under your roof, and I feel that I
must leave you forever. Do not worry about my future, for that is provided for;
and, above all, do not search for me, for it will be fruitless labour and an
ill-service to me. In life or in death, I am ever your loving, “‘MARY.’“What
could she mean by that note, Mr. Holmes? Do you think it pointsto suicide?”“No,
no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best possible solution.I trust, Mr.
Holder, that you are nearing the end of your troubles.”“Ha! You say so! You have
heard something, Mr. Holmes; you have learnedsomething! Where are the gems?”“You
would not think £ 1000 apiece an excessive sum for them?”“I would pay ten.”“That
would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. Andthere is a little
reward, I fancy. Have you your cheque-book? Here is apen. Better make it out for
£ 4000.”With a dazed face the banker made out the required check. Holmes
walkedover to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of gold with
threegems in it, and threw it down upon the table.With a shriek of joy our
client clutched it up.“You have it!” he gasped. “I am saved! I am saved!”The
reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and hehugged his
recovered gems to his bosom.“There is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder,” said
Sherlock Holmesrather sternly.“Owe!” He caught up a pen. “Name the sum, and I
will pay it.”“No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to that
noblelad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as I should beproud
to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have one.”“Then it was not Arthur
who took them?”“I told you yesterday, and I repeat to-day, that it was not.”“You
are sure of it! Then let us hurry to him at once to let him knowthat the truth
is known.”“He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an
interviewwith him, and finding that he would not tell me the story, I told it
tohim, on which he had to confess that I was right and to add the veryfew
details which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news of thismorning, however,
may open his lips.”“For Heaven’s sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinary
mystery!”“I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it.
Andlet me say to you, first, that which it is hardest for me to say andfor you
to hear: there has been an understanding between Sir GeorgeBurnwell and your
niece Mary. They have now fled together.”“My Mary? Impossible!”“It is
unfortunately more than possible; it is certain. Neither you noryour son knew
the true character of this man when you admitted him intoyour family circle. He
is one of the most dangerous men in England—aruined gambler, an absolutely
desperate villain, a man without heart orconscience. Your niece knew nothing of
such men. When he breathed hisvows to her, as he had done to a hundred before
her, she flatteredherself that she alone had touched his heart. The devil knows
best whathe said, but at least she became his tool and was in the habit ofseeing
him nearly every evening.”“I cannot, and I will not, believe it!” cried the
banker with an ashenface.“I will tell you, then, what occurred in your house
last night. Yourniece, when you had, as she thought, gone to your room, slipped
downand talked to her lover through the window which leads into the stablelane.
His footmarks had pressed right through the snow, so long had hestood there. She
told him of the coronet. His wicked lust for goldkindled at the news, and he
bent her to his will. I have no doubt thatshe loved you, but there are women in
whom the love of a loverextinguishes all other loves, and I think that she must
have been one.She had hardly listened to his instructions when she saw you
comingdownstairs, on which she closed the window rapidly and told you aboutone
of the servants’ escapade with her wooden-legged lover, which wasall perfectly
true.“Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his interview with you but heslept
badly on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. In themiddle of the
night he heard a soft tread pass his door, so he roseand, looking out, was
surprised to see his cousin walking verystealthily along the passage until she
disappeared into yourdressing-room. Petrified with astonishment, the lad slipped
on someclothes and waited there in the dark to see what would come of
thisstrange affair. Presently she emerged from the room again, and in thelight
of the passage-lamp your son saw that she carried the preciouscoronet in her
hands. She passed down the stairs, and he, thrillingwith horror, ran along and
slipped behind the curtain near your door,whence he could see what passed in the
hall beneath. He saw herstealthily open the window, hand out the coronet to
someone in thegloom, and then closing it once more hurry back to her room,
passingquite close to where he stood hid behind the curtain.“As long as she was
on the scene he could not take any action without ahorrible exposure of the
woman whom he loved. But the instant that shewas gone he realised how crushing a
misfortune this would be for you,and how all-important it was to set it right.
He rushed down, just ashe was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out
into the snow,and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure in
themoonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried to get away, but Arthur caughthim, and
there was a struggle between them, your lad tugging at oneside of the coronet,
and his opponent at the other. In the scuffle,your son struck Sir George and cut
him over the eye. Then somethingsuddenly snapped, and your son, finding that he
had the coronet in hishands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to your
room, and hadjust observed that the coronet had been twisted in the struggle and
wasendeavouring to straighten it when you appeared upon the scene.”“Is it
possible?” gasped the banker.“You then roused his anger by calling him names at
a moment when hefelt that he had deserved your warmest thanks. He could not
explain thetrue state of affairs without betraying one who certainly
deservedlittle enough consideration at his hands. He took the more
chivalrousview, however, and preserved her secret.”“And that was why she
shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet,”cried Mr. Holder. “Oh, my God!
what a blind fool I have been! And hisasking to be allowed to go out for five
minutes! The dear fellow wantedto see if the missing piece were at the scene of
the struggle. Howcruelly I have misjudged him!”“When I arrived at the house,”
continued Holmes, “I at once went verycarefully round it to observe if there
were any traces in the snowwhich might help me. I knew that none had fallen
since the eveningbefore, and also that there had been a strong frost to
preserveimpressions. I passed along the tradesmen’s path, but found it
alltrampled down and indistinguishable. Just beyond it, however, at thefar side
of the kitchen door, a woman had stood and talked with a man,whose round
impressions on one side showed that he had a wooden leg. Icould even tell that
they had been disturbed, for the woman had runback swiftly to the door, as was
shown by the deep toe and light heelmarks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little,
and then had gone away. Ithought at the time that this might be the maid and her
sweetheart, ofwhom you had already spoken to me, and inquiry showed it was so.
Ipassed round the garden without seeing anything more than randomtracks, which I
took to be the police; but when I got into the stablelane a very long and
complex story was written in the snow in front ofme.“There was a double line of
tracks of a booted man, and a second doubleline which I saw with delight
belonged to a man with naked feet. I wasat once convinced from what you had told
me that the latter was yourson. The first had walked both ways, but the other
had run swiftly, andas his tread was marked in places over the depression of the
boot, itwas obvious that he had passed after the other. I followed them up
andfound they led to the hall window, where Boots had worn all the snowaway
while waiting. Then I walked to the other end, which was a hundredyards or more
down the lane. I saw where Boots had faced round, wherethe snow was cut up as
though there had been a struggle, and, finally,where a few drops of blood had
fallen, to show me that I was notmistaken. Boots had then run down the lane, and
another little smudgeof blood showed that it was he who had been hurt. When he
came to thehigh road at the other end, I found that the pavement had been
cleared,so there was an end to that clue.“On entering the house, however, I
examined, as you remember, the silland framework of the hall window with my
lens, and I could at once seethat someone had passed out. I could distinguish
the outline of aninstep where the wet foot had been placed in coming in. I was
thenbeginning to be able to form an opinion as to what had occurred. A manhad
waited outside the window; someone had brought the gems; the deedhad been
overseen by your son; he had pursued the thief; had struggledwith him; they had
each tugged at the coronet, their united strengthcausing injuries which neither
alone could have effected. He hadreturned with the prize, but had left a
fragment in the grasp of hisopponent. So far I was clear. The question now was,
who was the man, andwho was it brought him the coronet?“It is an old maxim of
mine that when you have excluded the impossible,whatever remains, however
improbable, must be the truth. Now, I knewthat it was not you who had brought it
down, so there only remainedyour niece and the maids. But if it were the maids,
why should your sonallow himself to be accused in their place? There could be no
possiblereason. As he loved his cousin, however, there was an
excellentexplanation why he should retain her secret—the more so as the
secretwas a disgraceful one. When I remembered that you had seen her at
thatwindow, and how she had fainted on seeing the coronet again, myconjecture
became a certainty.“And who could it be who was her confederate? A lover
evidently, forwho else could outweigh the love and gratitude which she must feel
toyou? I knew that you went out little, and that your circle of friendswas a
very limited one. But among them was Sir George Burnwell. I hadheard of him
before as being a man of evil reputation among women. Itmust have been he who
wore those boots and retained the missing gems.Even though he knew that Arthur
had discovered him, he might stillflatter himself that he was safe, for the lad
could not say a wordwithout compromising his own family.“Well, your own good
sense will suggest what measures I took next. Iwent in the shape of a loafer to
Sir George’s house, managed to pick upan acquaintance with his valet, learned
that his master had cut hishead the night before, and, finally, at the expense
of six shillings,made all sure by buying a pair of his cast-off shoes. With
these Ijourneyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactly fitted
thetracks.”“I saw an ill-dressed vagabond in the lane yesterday evening,” said
Mr.Holder.“Precisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home
andchanged my clothes. It was a delicate part which I had to play then,for I saw
that a prosecution must be avoided to avert scandal, and Iknew that so astute a
villain would see that our hands were tied in thematter. I went and saw him. At
first, of course, he denied everything.But when I gave him every particular that
had occurred, he tried tobluster and took down a life-preserver from the wall. I
knew my man,however, and I clapped a pistol to his head before he could
strike.Then he became a little more reasonable. I told him that we would givehim
a price for the stones he held—£ 1000 apiece. That brought out thefirst signs of
grief that he had shown. ‘Why, dash it all!’ said he,‘I’ve let them go at six
hundred for the three!’ I soon managed to getthe address of the receiver who had
them, on promising him that therewould be no prosecution. Off I set to him, and
after much chaffering Igot our stones at £ 1000 apiece. Then I looked in upon
your son, toldhim that all was right, and eventually got to my bed about two
o’clock,after what I may call a really hard day’s work.”“A day which has saved
England from a great public scandal,” said thebanker, rising. “Sir, I cannot
find words to thank you, but you shallnot find me ungrateful for what you have
done. Your skill has indeedexceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must
fly to my dear boyto apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him. As to
what youtell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not even your skill
caninform me where she is now.”“I think that we may safely say,” returned
Holmes, “that she iswherever Sir George Burnwell is. It is equally certain, too,
thatwhatever her sins are, they will soon receive a more than
sufficientpunishment.”XII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES“To the man who
loves art for its own sake,” remarked Sherlock Holmes,tossing aside the
advertisement sheet of _The Daily Telegraph_, “it isfrequently in its least
important and lowliest manifestations that thekeenest pleasure is to be derived.
It is pleasant to me to observe,Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth
that in these littlerecords of our cases which you have been good enough to draw
up, and, Iam bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have given
prominencenot so much to the many _causes célèbres_ and sensational trials
inwhich I have figured but rather to those incidents which may have beentrivial
in themselves, but which have given room for those faculties ofdeduction and of
logical synthesis which I have made my specialprovince.”“And yet,” said I,
smiling, “I cannot quite hold myself absolved fromthe charge of sensationalism
which has been urged against my records.”“You have erred, perhaps,” he observed,
taking up a glowing cinder withthe tongs and lighting with it the long
cherry-wood pipe which was wontto replace his clay when he was in a disputatious
rather than ameditative mood—“you have erred perhaps in attempting to put colour
andlife into each of your statements instead of confining yourself to thetask of
placing upon record that severe reasoning from cause to effectwhich is really
the only notable feature about the thing.”“It seems to me that I have done you
full justice in the matter,” Iremarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by
the egotism which Ihad more than once observed to be a strong factor in my
friend’ssingular character.“No, it is not selfishness or conceit,” said he,
answering, as was hiswont, my thoughts rather than my words. “If I claim full
justice for myart, it is because it is an impersonal thing—a thing beyond
myself.Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the logic ratherthan
upon the crime that you should dwell. You have degraded whatshould have been a
course of lectures into a series of tales.”It was a cold morning of the early
spring, and we sat after breakfaston either side of a cheery fire in the old
room at Baker Street. Athick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-coloured
houses, and theopposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through the
heavyyellow wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the white cloth andglimmer of
china and metal, for the table had not been cleared yet.Sherlock Holmes had been
silent all the morning, dipping continuouslyinto the advertisement columns of a
succession of papers until at last,having apparently given up his search, he had
emerged in no very sweettemper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.“At
the same time,” he remarked after a pause, during which he had satpuffing at his
long pipe and gazing down into the fire, “you can hardlybe open to a charge of
sensationalism, for out of these cases which youhave been so kind as to interest
yourself in, a fair proportion do nottreat of crime, in its legal sense, at all.
The small matter in which Iendeavoured to help the King of Bohemia, the singular
experience ofMiss Mary Sutherland, the problem connected with the man with
thetwisted lip, and the incident of the noble bachelor, were all matterswhich
are outside the pale of the law. But in avoiding the sensational,I fear that you
may have bordered on the trivial.”“The end may have been so,” I answered, “but
the methods I hold to havebeen novel and of interest.”“Pshaw, my dear fellow,
what do the public, the great unobservantpublic, who could hardly tell a weaver
by his tooth or a compositor byhis left thumb, care about the finer shades of
analysis and deduction!But, indeed, if you are trivial, I cannot blame you, for
the days ofthe great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man, has lost
allenterprise and originality. As to my own little practice, it seems tobe
degenerating into an agency for recovering lost lead pencils andgiving advice to
young ladies from boarding-schools. I think that Ihave touched bottom at last,
however. This note I had this morningmarks my zero-point, I fancy. Read it!” He
tossed a crumpled letteracross to me.It was dated from Montague Place upon the
preceding evening, and ranthus: “DEAR MR. HOLMES,—I am very anxious to consult
you as to whether I should or should not accept a situation which has been
offered to me as governess. I shall call at half-past ten to-morrow if I do not
inconvenience you. Yours faithfully, “VIOLET HUNTER.”“Do you know the young
lady?” I asked.“Not I.”“It is half-past ten now.”“Yes, and I have no doubt that
is her ring.”“It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You
rememberthat the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere
whimat first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be so in thiscase,
also.”“Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, forhere,
unless I am much mistaken, is the person in question.”As he spoke the door
opened and a young lady entered the room. She wasplainly but neatly dressed,
with a bright, quick face, freckled like aplover’s egg, and with the brisk
manner of a woman who has had her ownway to make in the world.“You will excuse
my troubling you, I am sure,” said she, as mycompanion rose to greet her, “but I
have had a very strange experience,and as I have no parents or relations of any
sort from whom I could askadvice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind
enough to tell me whatI should do.”“Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. I shall be
happy to do anything that Ican to serve you.”I could see that Holmes was
favourably impressed by the manner andspeech of his new client. He looked her
over in his searching fashion,and then composed himself, with his lids drooping
and his finger-tipstogether, to listen to her story.“I have been a governess for
five years,” said she, “in the family ofColonel Spence Munro, but two months ago
the colonel received anappointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and took his
children over toAmerica with him, so that I found myself without a situation.
Iadvertised, and I answered advertisements, but without success. At lastthe
little money which I had saved began to run short, and I was at mywit’s end as
to what I should do.“There is a well-known agency for governesses in the West
End calledWestaway’s, and there I used to call about once a week in order to
seewhether anything had turned up which might suit me. Westaway was thename of
the founder of the business, but it is really managed by MissStoper. She sits in
her own little office, and the ladies who areseeking employment wait in an
anteroom, and are then shown in one byone, when she consults her ledgers and
sees whether she has anythingwhich would suit them.“Well, when I called last
week I was shown into the little office asusual, but I found that Miss Stoper
was not alone. A prodigiously stoutman with a very smiling face and a great
heavy chin which rolled downin fold upon fold over his throat sat at her elbow
with a pair ofglasses on his nose, looking very earnestly at the ladies who
entered.As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chair and turned quickly toMiss
Stoper.“‘That will do,’ said he; ‘I could not ask for anything better.Capital!
capital!’ He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his handstogether in the most
genial fashion. He was such a comfortable-lookingman that it was quite a
pleasure to look at him.“‘You are looking for a situation, miss?’ he
asked.“‘Yes, sir.’“‘As governess?’“‘Yes, sir.’“‘And what salary do you ask?’“‘I
had £ 4 a month in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.’“‘Oh, tut, tut!
sweating—rank sweating!’ he cried, throwing his fathands out into the air like a
man who is in a boiling passion. ‘Howcould anyone offer so pitiful a sum to a
lady with such attractions andaccomplishments?’“‘My accomplishments, sir, may be
less than you imagine,’ said I. ‘Alittle French, a little German, music, and
drawing—’“‘Tut, tut!’ he cried. ‘This is all quite beside the question. Thepoint
is, have you or have you not the bearing and deportment of alady? There it is in
a nutshell. If you have not, you are not fittedfor the rearing of a child who
may some day play a considerable part inthe history of the country. But if you
have, why, then, how could anygentleman ask you to condescend to accept anything
under the threefigures? Your salary with me, madam, would commence at £ 100 a
year.’“You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such anoffer
seemed almost too good to be true. The gentleman, however, seeingperhaps the
look of incredulity upon my face, opened a pocket-book andtook out a note.“‘It
is also my custom,’ said he, smiling in the most pleasant fashionuntil his eyes
were just two little shining slits amid the whitecreases of his face, ‘to
advance to my young ladies half their salarybeforehand, so that they may meet
any little expenses of their journeyand their wardrobe.’“It seemed to me that I
had never met so fascinating and so thoughtfula man. As I was already in debt to
my tradesmen, the advance was agreat convenience, and yet there was something
unnatural about thewhole transaction which made me wish to know a little more
before Iquite committed myself.“‘May I ask where you live, sir?’ said
I.“‘Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Copper Beeches, five miles onthe far
side of Winchester. It is the most lovely country, my dearyoung lady, and the
dearest old country-house.’“‘And my duties, sir? I should be glad to know what
they would be.’“‘One child—one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if you
couldsee him killing cockroaches with a slipper! Smack! smack! smack! Threegone
before you could wink!’ He leaned back in his chair and laughedhis eyes into his
head again.“I was a little startled at the nature of the child’s amusement,
butthe father’s laughter made me think that perhaps he was joking.“‘My sole
duties, then,’ I asked, ‘are to take charge of a singlechild?’“‘No, no, not the
sole, not the sole, my dear young lady,’ he cried.‘Your duty would be, as I am
sure your good sense would suggest, toobey any little commands my wife might
give, provided always that theywere such commands as a lady might with propriety
obey. You see nodifficulty, heh?’“‘I should be happy to make myself
useful.’“‘Quite so. In dress now, for example. We are faddy people,
youknow—faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to wear any dress whichwe
might give you, you would not object to our little whim. Heh?’“‘No,’ said I,
considerably astonished at his words.“‘Or to sit here, or sit there, that would
not be offensive to you?’“‘Oh, no.’“‘Or to cut your hair quite short before you
come to us?’“I could hardly believe my ears. As you may observe, Mr. Holmes,
myhair is somewhat luxuriant, and of a rather peculiar tint of chestnut.It has
been considered artistic. I could not dream of sacrificing it inthis offhand
fashion.“‘I am afraid that that is quite impossible,’ said I. He had
beenwatching me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadowpass over
his face as I spoke.“‘I am afraid that it is quite essential,’ said he. ‘It is a
littlefancy of my wife’s, and ladies’ fancies, you know, madam, ladies’fancies
must be consulted. And so you won’t cut your hair?’“‘No, sir, I really could
not,’ I answered firmly.“‘Ah, very well; then that quite settles the matter. It
is a pity,because in other respects you would really have done very nicely.
Inthat case, Miss Stoper, I had best inspect a few more of your
youngladies.’“The manageress had sat all this while busy with her papers without
aword to either of us, but she glanced at me now with so much annoyanceupon her
face that I could not help suspecting that she had lost ahandsome commission
through my refusal.“‘Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books?’ she
asked.“‘If you please, Miss Stoper.’“‘Well, really, it seems rather useless,
since you refuse the mostexcellent offers in this fashion,’ said she sharply.
‘You can hardlyexpect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for
you.Good-day to you, Miss Hunter.’ She struck a gong upon the table, and Iwas
shown out by the page.“Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodgings and
found littleenough in the cupboard, and two or three bills upon the table, I
beganto ask myself whether I had not done a very foolish thing. After all,if
these people had strange fads and expected obedience on the mostextraordinary
matters, they were at least ready to pay for theireccentricity. Very few
governesses in England are getting £ 100 a year.Besides, what use was my hair to
me? Many people are improved bywearing it short and perhaps I should be among
the number. Next day Iwas inclined to think that I had made a mistake, and by
the day after Iwas sure of it. I had almost overcome my pride so far as to go
back tothe agency and inquire whether the place was still open when I
receivedthis letter from the gentleman himself. I have it here and I will readit
to you:“‘The Copper Beeches, near Winchester. “‘DEAR MISS HUNTER,—Miss Stoper
has very kindly given me your address, and I write from here to ask you whether
you have reconsidered your decision. My wife is very anxious that you should
come, for she has been much attracted by my description of you. We are willing
to give £ 30 a quarter, or £ 120 a year, so as to recompense you for any little
inconvenience which our fads may cause you. They are not very exacting, after
all. My wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would like you
to wear such a dress indoors in the morning. You need not, however, go to the
expense of purchasing one, as we have one belonging to my dear daughter Alice
(now in Philadelphia), which would, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as
to sitting here or there, or amusing yourself in any manner indicated, that need
cause you no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it is no doubt a pity,
especially as I could not help remarking its beauty during our short interview,
but I am afraid that I must remain firm upon this point, and I only hope that
the increased salary may recompense you for the loss. Your duties, as far as the
child is concerned, are very light. Now do try to come, and I shall meet you
with the dog-cart at Winchester. Let me know your train. Yours faithfully,
“‘JEPHRO RUCASTLE.’“That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes,
and my mindis made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, that
beforetaking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter to
yourconsideration.”“Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles
thequestion,” said Holmes, smiling.“But you would not advise me to refuse?”“I
confess that it is not the situation which I should like to see asister of mine
apply for.”“What is the meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes?”“Ah, I have no data. I
cannot tell. Perhaps you have yourself formedsome opinion?”“Well, there seems to
me to be only one possible solution. Mr. Rucastleseemed to be a very kind,
good-natured man. Is it not possible that hiswife is a lunatic, that he desires
to keep the matter quiet for fearshe should be taken to an asylum, and that he
humours her fancies inevery way in order to prevent an outbreak?”“That is a
possible solution—in fact, as matters stand, it is the mostprobable one. But in
any case it does not seem to be a nice householdfor a young lady.”“But the
money, Mr. Holmes, the money!”“Well, yes, of course the pay is good—too good.
That is what makes meuneasy. Why should they give you £ 120 a year, when they
could havetheir pick for £ 40? There must be some strong reason behind.”“I
thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understandafterwards if I
wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if Ifelt that you were at the
back of me.”“Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that
yourlittle problem promises to be the most interesting which has come myway for
some months. There is something distinctly novel about some ofthe features. If
you should find yourself in doubt or in danger—”“Danger! What danger do you
foresee?”Holmes shook his head gravely. “It would cease to be a danger if
wecould define it,” said he. “But at any time, day or night, a telegramwould
bring me down to your help.”“That is enough.” She rose briskly from her chair
with the anxiety allswept from her face. “I shall go down to Hampshire quite
easy in mymind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poor
hairto-night, and start for Winchester to-morrow.” With a few gratefulwords to
Holmes she bade us both good-night and bustled off upon herway.“At least,” said
I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending thestairs, “she seems to be a
young lady who is very well able to takecare of herself.”“And she would need to
be,” said Holmes gravely. “I am much mistaken ifwe do not hear from her before
many days are past.”It was not very long before my friend’s prediction was
fulfilled. Afortnight went by, during which I frequently found my thoughts
turningin her direction and wondering what strange side-alley of humanexperience
this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusual salary, thecurious conditions,
the light duties, all pointed to somethingabnormal, though whether a fad or a
plot, or whether the man were aphilanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond
my powers todetermine. As to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently for half
anhour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but he swept thematter
away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it. “Data! data!data!” he cried
impatiently. “I can’t make bricks without clay.” Andyet he would always wind up
by muttering that no sister of his shouldever have accepted such a situation.The
telegram which we eventually received came late one night just as Iwas thinking
of turning in and Holmes was settling down to one of thoseall-night chemical
researches which he frequently indulged in, when Iwould leave him stooping over
a retort and a test-tube at night andfind him in the same position when I came
down to breakfast in themorning. He opened the yellow envelope, and then,
glancing at themessage, threw it across to me.“Just look up the trains in
Bradshaw,” said he, and turned back to hischemical studies.The summons was a
brief and urgent one.“Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winchester at midday
to-morrow,”it said. “Do come! I am at my wit’s end.“HUNTER.”“Will you come with
me?” asked Holmes, glancing up.“I should wish to.”“Just look it up, then.”“There
is a train at half-past nine,” said I, glancing over myBradshaw. “It is due at
Winchester at 11:30.”“That will do very nicely. Then perhaps I had better
postpone myanalysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at our best in
themorning.”By eleven o’clock the next day we were well upon our way to the
oldEnglish capital. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers all theway
down, but after we had passed the Hampshire border he threw themdown and began
to admire the scenery. It was an ideal spring day, alight blue sky, flecked with
little fleecy white clouds drifting acrossfrom west to east. The sun was shining
very brightly, and yet there wasan exhilarating nip in the air, which set an
edge to a man’s energy.All over the countryside, away to the rolling hills
around Aldershot,the little red and grey roofs of the farm-steadings peeped out
fromamid the light green of the new foliage.“Are they not fresh and beautiful?”
I cried with all the enthusiasm ofa man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.But
Holmes shook his head gravely.“Do you know, Watson,” said he, “that it is one of
the curses of a mindwith a turn like mine that I must look at everything with
reference tomy own special subject. You look at these scattered houses, and you
areimpressed by their beauty. I look at them, and the only thought whichcomes to
me is a feeling of their isolation and of the impunity withwhich crime may be
committed there.”“Good heavens!” I cried. “Who would associate crime with these
dear oldhomesteads?”“They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief,
Watson,founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in Londondo
not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the smiling andbeautiful
countryside.”“You horrify me!”“But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of
public opinion can doin the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no
lane so vilethat the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard’s
blow,does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours, and thenthe
whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word ofcomplaint can set it
going, and there is but a step between the crimeand the dock. But look at these
lonely houses, each in its own fields,filled for the most part with poor
ignorant folk who know little of thelaw. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty,
the hidden wickedness whichmay go on, year in, year out, in such places, and
none the wiser. Hadthis lady who appeals to us for help gone to live in
Winchester, Ishould never have had a fear for her. It is the five miles of
countrywhich makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she is not
personallythreatened.”“No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get
away.”“Quite so. She has her freedom.”“What _can_ be the matter, then? Can you
suggest no explanation?”“I have devised seven separate explanations, each of
which would coverthe facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correct
canonly be determined by the fresh information which we shall no doubtfind
waiting for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral, and weshall soon
learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell.”The Black Swan is an inn of repute in
the High Street, at no distancefrom the station, and there we found the young
lady waiting for us. Shehad engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awaited us
upon the table.“I am so delighted that you have come,” she said earnestly. “It
is sovery kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do.
Youradvice will be altogether invaluable to me.”“Pray tell us what has happened
to you.”“I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastle
tobe back before three. I got his leave to come into town this morning,though he
little knew for what purpose.”“Let us have everything in its due order.” Holmes
thrust his long thinlegs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.“In
the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with noactual
ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fair tothem to say that.
But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy in mymind about them.”“What can
you not understand?”“Their reasons for their conduct. But you shall have it all
just as itoccurred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here and drove me
inhis dog-cart to the Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifullysituated,
but it is not beautiful in itself, for it is a large squareblock of a house,
whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with dampand bad weather. There are
grounds round it, woods on three sides, andon the fourth a field which slopes
down to the Southampton high road,which curves past about a hundred yards from
the front door. Thisground in front belongs to the house, but the woods all
round are partof Lord Southerton’s preserves. A clump of copper beeches
immediatelyin front of the hall door has given its name to the place.“I was
driven over by my employer, who was as amiable as ever, and wasintroduced by him
that evening to his wife and the child. There was notruth, Mr. Holmes, in the
conjecture which seemed to us to be probablein your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs.
Rucastle is not mad. I found her tobe a silent, pale-faced woman, much younger
than her husband, not morethan thirty, I should think, while he can hardly be
less thanforty-five. From their conversation I have gathered that they have
beenmarried about seven years, that he was a widower, and that his onlychild by
the first wife was the daughter who has gone to Philadelphia.Mr. Rucastle told
me in private that the reason why she had left themwas that she had an
unreasoning aversion to her stepmother. As thedaughter could not have been less
than twenty, I can quite imagine thather position must have been uncomfortable
with her father’s young wife.“Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in
mind as well as infeature. She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse.
She was anonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted both
toher husband and to her little son. Her light grey eyes wanderedcontinually
from one to the other, noting every little want andforestalling it if possible.
He was kind to her also in his bluff,boisterous fashion, and on the whole they
seemed to be a happy couple.And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She
would often be lostin deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face. More
than once Ihave surprised her in tears. I have thought sometimes that it was
thedisposition of her child which weighed upon her mind, for I have nevermet so
utterly spoiled and so ill-natured a little creature. He issmall for his age,
with a head which is quite disproportionately large.His whole life appears to be
spent in an alternation between savagefits of passion and gloomy intervals of
sulking. Giving pain to anycreature weaker than himself seems to be his one idea
of amusement, andhe shows quite remarkable talent in planning the capture of
mice,little birds, and insects. But I would rather not talk about thecreature,
Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has little to do with my story.”“I am glad of all
details,” remarked my friend, “whether they seem toyou to be relevant or not.”“I
shall try not to miss anything of importance. The one unpleasantthing about the
house, which struck me at once, was the appearance andconduct of the servants.
There are only two, a man and his wife.Toller, for that is his name, is a rough,
uncouth man, with grizzledhair and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink.
Twice since I havebeen with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle
seemed totake no notice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong woman with
asour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle and much less amiable. They are amost
unpleasant couple, but fortunately I spend most of my time in thenursery and my
own room, which are next to each other in one corner ofthe building.“For two
days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was veryquiet; on the third,
Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast andwhispered something to her
husband.“‘Oh, yes,’ said he, turning to me, ‘we are very much obliged to
you,Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as to cut your hair.I
assure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota from yourappearance. We
shall now see how the electric-blue dress will becomeyou. You will find it laid
out upon the bed in your room, and if youwould be so good as to put it on we
should both be extremely obliged.’“The dress which I found waiting for me was of
a peculiar shade ofblue. It was of excellent material, a sort of beige, but it
boreunmistakable signs of having been worn before. It could not have been
abetter fit if I had been measured for it. Both Mr. and Mrs. Rucastleexpressed a
delight at the look of it, which seemed quite exaggeratedin its vehemence. They
were waiting for me in the drawing-room, whichis a very large room, stretching
along the entire front of the house,with three long windows reaching down to the
floor. A chair had beenplaced close to the central window, with its back turned
towards it. Inthis I was asked to sit, and then Mr. Rucastle, walking up and
down onthe other side of the room, began to tell me a series of the
funnieststories that I have ever listened to. You cannot imagine how comical
hewas, and I laughed until I was quite weary. Mrs. Rucastle, however, whohas
evidently no sense of humour, never so much as smiled, but sat withher hands in
her lap, and a sad, anxious look upon her face. After anhour or so, Mr. Rucastle
suddenly remarked that it was time to commencethe duties of the day, and that I
might change my dress and go tolittle Edward in the nursery.“Two days later this
same performance was gone through under exactlysimilar circumstances. Again I
changed my dress, again I sat in thewindow, and again I laughed very heartily at
the funny stories of whichmy employer had an immense _répertoire_, and which he
told inimitably.Then he handed me a yellow-backed novel, and moving my chair a
littlesideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon the page, he begged meto
read aloud to him. I read for about ten minutes, beginning in theheart of a
chapter, and then suddenly, in the middle of a sentence, heordered me to cease
and to change my dress.“You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curious I became
as to whatthe meaning of this extraordinary performance could possibly be.
Theywere always very careful, I observed, to turn my face away from thewindow,
so that I became consumed with the desire to see what was goingon behind my
back. At first it seemed to be impossible, but I soondevised a means. My
hand-mirror had been broken, so a happy thoughtseized me, and I concealed a
piece of the glass in my handkerchief. Onthe next occasion, in the midst of my
laughter, I put my handkerchiefup to my eyes, and was able with a little
management to see all thatthere was behind me. I confess that I was
disappointed. There wasnothing. At least that was my first impression. At the
second glance,however, I perceived that there was a man standing in the
SouthamptonRoad, a small bearded man in a grey suit, who seemed to be looking
inmy direction. The road is an important highway, and there are usuallypeople
there. This man, however, was leaning against the railings whichbordered our
field and was looking earnestly up. I lowered myhandkerchief and glanced at Mrs.
Rucastle to find her eyes fixed uponme with a most searching gaze. She said
nothing, but I am convincedthat she had divined that I had a mirror in my hand
and had seen whatwas behind me. She rose at once.“‘Jephro,’ said she, ‘there is
an impertinent fellow upon the roadthere who stares up at Miss Hunter.’“‘No
friend of yours, Miss Hunter?’ he asked.“‘No, I know no one in these
parts.’“‘Dear me! How very impertinent! Kindly turn round and motion to him togo
away.’“‘Surely it would be better to take no notice.’“‘No, no, we should have
him loitering here always. Kindly turn roundand wave him away like that.’“I did
as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew downthe blind. That
was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat againin the window, nor have I
worn the blue dress, nor seen the man in theroad.”“Pray continue,” said Holmes.
“Your narrative promises to be a mostinteresting one.”“You will find it rather
disconnected, I fear, and there may prove tobe little relation between the
different incidents of which I speak. Onthe very first day that I was at the
Copper Beeches, Mr. Rucastle tookme to a small outhouse which stands near the
kitchen door. As weapproached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and the
sound asof a large animal moving about.“‘Look in here!’ said Mr. Rucastle,
showing me a slit between twoplanks. ‘Is he not a beauty?’“I looked through and
was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of a vaguefigure huddled up in the
darkness.“‘Don’t be frightened,’ said my employer, laughing at the start which
Ihad given. ‘It’s only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but reallyold Toller,
my groom, is the only man who can do anything with him. Wefeed him once a day,
and not too much then, so that he is always askeen as mustard. Toller lets him
loose every night, and God help thetrespasser whom he lays his fangs upon. For
goodness’ sake don’t youever on any pretext set your foot over the threshold at
night, for it’sas much as your life is worth.’“The warning was no idle one, for
two nights later I happened to lookout of my bedroom window about two o’clock in
the morning. It was abeautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the
house wassilvered over and almost as bright as day. I was standing, rapt in
thepeaceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that something wasmoving under
the shadow of the copper beeches. As it emerged into themoonshine I saw what it
was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf,tawny tinted, with hanging jowl,
black muzzle, and huge projectingbones. It walked slowly across the lawn and
vanished into the shadowupon the other side. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill
to my heartwhich I do not think that any burglar could have done.“And now I have
a very strange experience to tell you. I had, as youknow, cut off my hair in
London, and I had placed it in a great coil atthe bottom of my trunk. One
evening, after the child was in bed, Ibegan to amuse myself by examining the
furniture of my room and byrearranging my own little things. There was an old
chest of drawers inthe room, the two upper ones empty and open, the lower one
locked. Ihad filled the first two with my linen, and as I had still much to
packaway I was naturally annoyed at not having the use of the third drawer.It
struck me that it might have been fastened by a mere oversight, so Itook out my
bunch of keys and tried to open it. The very first keyfitted to perfection, and
I drew the drawer open. There was only onething in it, but I am sure that you
would never guess what it was. Itwas my coil of hair.“I took it up and examined
it. It was of the same peculiar tint, andthe same thickness. But then the
impossibility of the thing obtrudeditself upon me. How could my hair have been
locked in the drawer? Withtrembling hands I undid my trunk, turned out the
contents, and drewfrom the bottom my own hair. I laid the two tresses together,
and Iassure you that they were identical. Was it not extraordinary? Puzzleas I
would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. I returnedthe strange hair
to the drawer, and I said nothing of the matter to theRucastles as I felt that I
had put myself in the wrong by opening adrawer which they had locked.“I am
naturally observant, as you may have remarked, Mr. Holmes, and Isoon had a
pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. There wasone wing, however,
which appeared not to be inhabited at all. A doorwhich faced that which led into
the quarters of the Tollers opened intothis suite, but it was invariably locked.
One day, however, as Iascended the stair, I met Mr. Rucastle coming out through
this door,his keys in his hand, and a look on his face which made him a
verydifferent person to the round, jovial man to whom I was accustomed.
Hischeeks were red, his brow was all crinkled with anger, and the veinsstood out
at his temples with passion. He locked the door and hurriedpast me without a
word or a look.“This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in
thegrounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I couldsee
the windows of this part of the house. There were four of them in arow, three of
which were simply dirty, while the fourth was shutteredup. They were evidently
all deserted. As I strolled up and down,glancing at them occasionally, Mr.
Rucastle came out to me, looking asmerry and jovial as ever.“‘Ah!’ said he, ‘you
must not think me rude if I passed you without aword, my dear young lady. I was
preoccupied with business matters.’“I assured him that I was not offended. ‘By
the way,’ said I, ‘you seemto have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and
one of them has theshutters up.’“He looked surprised and, as it seemed to me, a
little startled at myremark.“‘Photography is one of my hobbies,’ said he. ‘I
have made my dark roomup there. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we
have come upon.Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believed it?’ He
spokein a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his eyes as he looked atme. I
read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.“Well, Mr. Holmes, from the
moment that I understood that there wassomething about that suite of rooms which
I was not to know, I was allon fire to go over them. It was not mere curiosity,
though I have myshare of that. It was more a feeling of duty—a feeling that some
goodmight come from my penetrating to this place. They talk of woman’sinstinct;
perhaps it was woman’s instinct which gave me that feeling.At any rate, it was
there, and I was keenly on the lookout for anychance to pass the forbidden
door.“It was only yesterday that the chance came. I may tell you that,besides
Mr. Rucastle, both Toller and his wife find something to do inthese deserted
rooms, and I once saw him carrying a large black linenbag with him through the
door. Recently he has been drinking hard, andyesterday evening he was very
drunk; and when I came upstairs there wasthe key in the door. I have no doubt at
all that he had left it there.Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle were both downstairs, and
the child was withthem, so that I had an admirable opportunity. I turned the key
gentlyin the lock, opened the door, and slipped through.“There was a little
passage in front of me, unpapered and uncarpeted,which turned at a right angle
at the farther end. Round this cornerwere three doors in a line, the first and
third of which were open.They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheerless,
with two windowsin the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that the
eveninglight glimmered dimly through them. The centre door was closed, andacross
the outside of it had been fastened one of the broad bars of aniron bed,
padlocked at one end to a ring in the wall, and fastened atthe other with stout
cord. The door itself was locked as well, and thekey was not there. This
barricaded door corresponded clearly with theshuttered window outside, and yet I
could see by the glimmer frombeneath it that the room was not in darkness.
Evidently there was askylight which let in light from above. As I stood in the
passagegazing at the sinister door and wondering what secret it might veil,
Isuddenly heard the sound of steps within the room and saw a shadow passbackward
and forward against the little slit of dim light which shoneout from under the
door. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at thesight, Mr. Holmes. My
overstrung nerves failed me suddenly, and Iturned and ran—ran as though some
dreadful hand were behind meclutching at the skirt of my dress. I rushed down
the passage, throughthe door, and straight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, who
was waitingoutside.“‘So,’ said he, smiling, ‘it was you, then. I thought that it
must bewhen I saw the door open.’“‘Oh, I am so frightened!’ I panted.“‘My dear
young lady! my dear young lady!’—you cannot think howcaressing and soothing his
manner was—‘and what has frightened you, mydear young lady?’“But his voice was
just a little too coaxing. He overdid it. I waskeenly on my guard against
him.“‘I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,’ I answered. ‘But itis so
lonely and eerie in this dim light that I was frightened and ranout again. Oh,
it is so dreadfully still in there!’“‘Only that?’ said he, looking at me
keenly.“‘Why, what did you think?’ I asked.“‘Why do you think that I lock this
door?’“‘I am sure that I do not know.’“‘It is to keep people out who have no
business there. Do you see?’ Hewas still smiling in the most amiable manner.“‘I
am sure if I had known—’“‘Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your
foot over thatthreshold again’—here in an instant the smile hardened into a grin
ofrage, and he glared down at me with the face of a demon—‘I’ll throw youto the
mastiff.’“I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that Imust
have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until Ifound myself lying
on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of you,Mr. Holmes. I could not live
there longer without some advice. I wasfrightened of the house, of the man, of
the woman, of the servants,even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I
could only bringyou down all would be well. Of course I might have fled from the
house,but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My mind was soonmade
up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went downto the office,
which is about half a mile from the house, and thenreturned, feeling very much
easier. A horrible doubt came into my mindas I approached the door lest the dog
might be loose, but I rememberedthat Toller had drunk himself into a state of
insensibility thatevening, and I knew that he was the only one in the household
who hadany influence with the savage creature, or who would venture to set
himfree. I slipped in in safety and lay awake half the night in my joy atthe
thought of seeing you. I had no difficulty in getting leave to comeinto
Winchester this morning, but I must be back before three o’clock,for Mr. and
Mrs. Rucastle are going on a visit, and will be away allthe evening, so that I
must look after the child. Now I have told youall my adventures, Mr. Holmes, and
I should be very glad if you couldtell me what it all means, and, above all,
what I should do.”Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary
story. Myfriend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in
hispockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon his face.“Is
Toller still drunk?” he asked.“Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she
could do nothingwith him.”“That is well. And the Rucastles go out
to-night?”“Yes.”“Is there a cellar with a good strong lock?”“Yes, the
wine-cellar.”“You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a very
braveand sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could perform onemore
feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think you a quiteexceptional
woman.”“I will try. What is it?”“We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven
o’clock, my friend and I.The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller
will, we hope, beincapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the
alarm. Ifyou could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turn thekey
upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely.”“I will do it.”“Excellent! We
shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of coursethere is only one feasible
explanation. You have been brought there topersonate someone, and the real
person is imprisoned in this chamber.That is obvious. As to who this prisoner
is, I have no doubt that it isthe daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember
right, who was said tohave gone to America. You were chosen, doubtless, as
resembling her inheight, figure, and the colour of your hair. Hers had been cut
off,very possibly in some illness through which she has passed, and so,
ofcourse, yours had to be sacrificed also. By a curious chance you cameupon her
tresses. The man in the road was undoubtedly some friend ofhers—possibly her
_fiancé_—and no doubt, as you wore the girl’s dressand were so like her, he was
convinced from your laughter, whenever hesaw you, and afterwards from your
gesture, that Miss Rucastle wasperfectly happy, and that she no longer desired
his attentions. The dogis let loose at night to prevent him from endeavouring to
communicatewith her. So much is fairly clear. The most serious point in the
caseis the disposition of the child.”“What on earth has that to do with it?” I
ejaculated.“My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light
asto the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents. Don’t you seethat
the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gained my firstreal insight
into the character of parents by studying their children.This child’s
disposition is abnormally cruel, merely for cruelty’ssake, and whether he
derives this from his smiling father, as I shouldsuspect, or from his mother, it
bodes evil for the poor girl who is intheir power.”“I am sure that you are
right, Mr. Holmes,” cried our client. “Athousand things come back to me which
make me certain that you have hitit. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing
help to this poorcreature.”“We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a
very cunning man. Wecan do nothing until seven o’clock. At that hour we shall be
with you,and it will not be long before we solve the mystery.”We were as good as
our word, for it was just seven when we reached theCopper Beeches, having put up
our trap at a wayside public-house. Thegroup of trees, with their dark leaves
shining like burnished metal inthe light of the setting sun, were sufficient to
mark the house evenhad Miss Hunter not been standing smiling on the
door-step.“Have you managed it?” asked Holmes.A loud thudding noise came from
somewhere downstairs. “That is Mrs.Toller in the cellar,” said she. “Her husband
lies snoring on thekitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of
Mr.Rucastle’s.”“You have done well indeed!” cried Holmes with enthusiasm. “Now
leadthe way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business.”We passed up
the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down a passage,and found ourselves in
front of the barricade which Miss Hunter haddescribed. Holmes cut the cord and
removed the transverse bar. Then hetried the various keys in the lock, but
without success. No sound camefrom within, and at the silence Holmes’ face
clouded over.“I trust that we are not too late,” said he. “I think, Miss
Hunter,that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder
toit, and we shall see whether we cannot make our way in.”It was an old rickety
door and gave at once before our united strength.Together we rushed into the
room. It was empty. There was no furnituresave a little pallet bed, a small
table, and a basketful of linen. Theskylight above was open, and the prisoner
gone.“There has been some villainy here,” said Holmes; “this beauty hasguessed
Miss Hunter’s intentions and has carried his victim off.”“But how?”“Through the
skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it.” He swunghimself up onto the
roof. “Ah, yes,” he cried, “here’s the end of along light ladder against the
eaves. That is how he did it.”“But it is impossible,” said Miss Hunter; “the
ladder was not therewhen the Rucastles went away.”“He has come back and done it.
I tell you that he is a clever anddangerous man. I should not be very much
surprised if this were hewhose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson,
that it would beas well for you to have your pistol ready.”The words were hardly
out of his mouth before a man appeared at thedoor of the room, a very fat and
burly man, with a heavy stick in hishand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk
against the wall at the sight ofhim, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and
confronted him.“You villain!” said he, “where’s your daughter?”The fat man cast
his eyes round, and then up at the open skylight.“It is for me to ask you that,”
he shrieked, “you thieves! Spies andthieves! I have caught you, have I? You are
in my power. I’ll serveyou!” He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as
he could go.“He’s gone for the dog!” cried Miss Hunter.“I have my revolver,”
said I.“Better close the front door,” cried Holmes, and we all rushed down
thestairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard thebaying of a
hound, and then a scream of agony, with a horrible worryingsound which it was
dreadful to listen to. An elderly man with a redface and shaking limbs came
staggering out at a side door.“My God!” he cried. “Someone has loosed the dog.
It’s not been fed fortwo days. Quick, quick, or it’ll be too late!”Holmes and I
rushed out and round the angle of the house, with Tollerhurrying behind us.
There was the huge famished brute, its black muzzleburied in Rucastle’s throat,
while he writhed and screamed upon theground. Running up, I blew its brains out,
and it fell over with itskeen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of
his neck. Withmuch labour we separated them and carried him, living but
horriblymangled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawing-room sofa,
andhaving dispatched the sobered Toller to bear the news to his wife, Idid what
I could to relieve his pain. We were all assembled round himwhen the door
opened, and a tall, gaunt woman entered the room.“Mrs. Toller!” cried Miss
Hunter.“Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went upto
you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn’t let me know what you wereplanning, for I
would have told you that your pains were wasted.”“Ha!” said Holmes, looking
keenly at her. “It is clear that Mrs. Tollerknows more about this matter than
anyone else.”“Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know.”“Then,
pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are several pointson which I must
confess that I am still in the dark.”“I will soon make it clear to you,” said
she; “and I’d have done sobefore now if I could ha’ got out from the cellar. If
there’spolice-court business over this, you’ll remember that I was the onethat
stood your friend, and that I was Miss Alice’s friend too.“She was never happy
at home, Miss Alice wasn’t, from the time that herfather married again. She was
slighted like and had no say in anything,but it never really became bad for her
until after she met Mr. Fowlerat a friend’s house. As well as I could learn,
Miss Alice had rights ofher own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she
was, that shenever said a word about them but just left everything in Mr.
Rucastle’shands. He knew he was safe with her; but when there was a chance of
ahusband coming forward, who would ask for all that the law would givehim, then
her father thought it time to put a stop on it. He wanted herto sign a paper, so
that whether she married or not, he could use hermoney. When she wouldn’t do it,
he kept on worrying her until she gotbrain-fever, and for six weeks was at
death’s door. Then she got betterat last, all worn to a shadow, and with her
beautiful hair cut off; butthat didn’t make no change in her young man, and he
stuck to her astrue as man could be.”“Ah,” said Holmes, “I think that what you
have been good enough to tellus makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can
deduce all thatremains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system
ofimprisonment?”“Yes, sir.”“And brought Miss Hunter down from London in order to
get rid of thedisagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler.”“That was it, sir.”“But
Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be,blockaded the
house, and having met you succeeded by certain arguments,metallic or otherwise,
in convincing you that your interests were thesame as his.”“Mr. Fowler was a
very kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman,” said Mrs.Toller serenely.“And in this
way he managed that your good man should have no want ofdrink, and that a ladder
should be ready at the moment when your masterhad gone out.”“You have it, sir,
just as it happened.”“I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller,” said
Holmes, “for youhave certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here
comesthe country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we hadbest
escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me that our_locus standi_
now is rather a questionable one.”And thus was solved the mystery of the
sinister house with the copperbeeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle
survived, but was always abroken man, kept alive solely through the care of his
devoted wife.They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much
ofRucastle’s past life that he finds it difficult to part from them. Mr.Fowler
and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, inSouthampton the day after
their flight, and he is now the holder of agovernment appointment in the island
of Mauritius. As to Miss VioletHunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my
disappointment, manifested nofurther interest in her when once she had ceased to
be the centre ofone of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school
atWalsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success. *** END
OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES *** Updated
editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating
the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!)
can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without
paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use
partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™
electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an
eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying
royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge
anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is
veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof
derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks
may be modified and printed and given away—you maydo practically ANYTHING in the
United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is
subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START:
FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing
this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase
“ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online
atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing
Project Gutenberg™electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this
Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand,
agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual
property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for
obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do
not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund
from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on
or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most
Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of
this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do
with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
(“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the
collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work
is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the
United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing,
performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long
asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you
will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to
electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping
this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License
whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place
where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws
in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the
United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of
thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing
or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™
work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of
any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed
all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active
links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must
appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or
distributed: This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the
Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to
check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts
not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it
is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If
you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase
“ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must
complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain
permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™
electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use
and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be
linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission
of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink
or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or
any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with
Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or
redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work,
withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1
withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™
License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any
binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the
official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no
additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting
a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull
Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge
a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any
Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that: • You pay a
royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project
Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your
applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required
to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked
as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money
paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of
receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access
to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works. • You provide, in accordance with
paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement
copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you
within 90 days of receipt of the work. • You comply with all other terms of this
agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works. 1.E.9. If you wish
to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of
works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain
permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the
manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth
in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend
considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and
proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the
ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project
Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored,
maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or
computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED
WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund”
described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a
ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to
you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU
HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL
NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover
adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a
refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to
the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical
medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or
entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a
replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically,
the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a
secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe
second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further
opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of
replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you
‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable
to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum
disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity
orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void
theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the
Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation,
anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with
this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and
distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability,
costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor
any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or
deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2.
Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is
synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by
the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new
computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and
donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to
provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project
Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can
help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a
non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The
Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax
deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s
laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at
www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project
GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot
survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission
ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely
distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The
Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and
charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance
requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork
and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit
donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of
compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not
solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation
requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations
from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International
donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning
tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws
alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for
current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of
otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate,
please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.Section 5. General Information About
Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator
of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could
befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which
are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice
is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any
particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG
searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about
Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg
LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how
tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
QUOTES TO SCRAPE [index.html]

Login [login.html]

“The world as we have created it is a process of our thinking. It cannot be
changed without changing our thinking.” by Albert Einstein (about)
[author/Albert-Einstein.html]
Tags: change [tag/change/page/1/index.html] deep-thoughts
[tag/deep-thoughts/page/1/index.html] thinking [tag/thinking/page/1/index.html]
world [tag/world/page/1/index.html]
“It is our choices, Harry, that show what we truly are, far more than our
abilities.” by J.K. Rowling (about) [author/J-K-Rowling.html]
Tags: abilities [tag/abilities/page/1/index.html] choices
[tag/choices/page/1/index.html]
“There are only two ways to live your life. One is as though nothing is a
miracle. The other is as though everything is a miracle.” by Albert Einstein
(about) [author/Albert-Einstein.html]
Tags: inspirational [tag/inspirational/page/1/index.html] life
[tag/life/page/1/index.html] live [tag/live/page/1/index.html] miracle
[tag/miracle/page/1/index.html] miracles [tag/miracles/page/1/index.html]
“The person, be it gentleman or lady, who has not pleasure in a good novel, must
be intolerably stupid.” by Jane Austen (about) [author/Jane-Austen.html]
Tags: aliteracy [tag/aliteracy/page/1/index.html] books
[tag/books/page/1/index.html] classic [tag/classic/page/1/index.html] humor
[tag/humor/page/1/index.html]
“Imperfection is beauty, madness is genius and it's better to be absolutely
ridiculous than absolutely boring.” by Marilyn Monroe (about)
[author/Marilyn-Monroe.html]
Tags: be-yourself [tag/be-yourself/page/1/index.html] inspirational
[tag/inspirational/page/1/index.html]
“Try not to become a man of success. Rather become a man of value.” by Albert
Einstein (about) [author/Albert-Einstein.html]
Tags: adulthood [tag/adulthood/page/1/index.html] success
[tag/success/page/1/index.html] value [tag/value/page/1/index.html]
“It is better to be hated for what you are than to be loved for what you are
not.” by André Gide (about) [author/Andre-Gide.html]
Tags: life [tag/life/page/1/index.html] love [tag/love/page/1/index.html]
“I have not failed. I've just found 10,000 ways that won't work.” by Thomas A.
Edison (about) [author/Thomas-A-Edison.html]
Tags: edison [tag/edison/page/1/index.html] failure
[tag/failure/page/1/index.html] inspirational
[tag/inspirational/page/1/index.html] paraphrased
[tag/paraphrased/page/1/index.html]
“A woman is like a tea bag; you never know how strong it is until it's in hot
water.” by Eleanor Roosevelt (about) [author/Eleanor-Roosevelt.html]
Tags: misattributed-eleanor-roosevelt
[tag/misattributed-eleanor-roosevelt/page/1/index.html]
“A day without sunshine is like, you know, night.” by Steve Martin (about)
[author/Steve-Martin.html]
Tags: humor [tag/humor/page/1/index.html] obvious
[tag/obvious/page/1/index.html] simile [tag/simile/page/1/index.html]
 * Next → [page/2/index.html]


TOP TEN TAGS

love [tag/love/index.html] inspirational [tag/inspirational/index.html] life
[tag/life/index.html] humor [tag/humor/index.html] books [tag/books/index.html]
reading [tag/reading/index.html] friendship [tag/friendship/index.html] friends
[tag/friends/index.html] truth [tag/truth/index.html] simile
[tag/simile/index.html]
QUOTES TO SCRAPE [../../../../index.html]

Login [../../../../login.html]


VIEWING TAG: CHANGE [index.html]

“The world as we have created it is a process of our thinking. It cannot be
changed without changing our thinking.” by Albert Einstein (about)
[../../../../author/Albert-Einstein.html]
Tags: change [index.html] deep-thoughts
[../../../deep-thoughts/page/1/index.html] thinking
[../../../thinking/page/1/index.html] world [../../../world/page/1/index.html]



TOP TEN TAGS

love [../../../love/index.html] inspirational
[../../../inspirational/index.html] life [../../../life/index.html] humor
[../../../humor/index.html] books [../../../books/index.html] reading
[../../../reading/index.html] friendship [../../../friendship/index.html]
friends [../../../friends/index.html] truth [../../../truth/index.html] simile
[../../../simile/index.html]
QUOTES TO SCRAPE [../../index.html]

Login [../../login.html]


VIEWING TAG: BOOKS [page/1/index.html]

“The person, be it gentleman or lady, who has not pleasure in a good novel, must
be intolerably stupid.” by Jane Austen (about) [../../author/Jane-Austen.html]
Tags: aliteracy [../aliteracy/page/1/index.html] books [page/1/index.html]
classic [../classic/page/1/index.html] humor [../humor/page/1/index.html]
“Good friends, good books, and a sleepy conscience: this is the ideal life.” by
Mark Twain (about) [../../author/Mark-Twain.html]
Tags: books [page/1/index.html] contentment [../contentment/page/1/index.html]
friends [../friends/page/1/index.html] friendship
[../friendship/page/1/index.html] life [../life/page/1/index.html]
“I have always imagined that Paradise will be a kind of library.” by Jorge Luis
Borges (about) [../../author/Jorge-Luis-Borges.html]
Tags: books [page/1/index.html] library [../library/page/1/index.html]
“You can never get a cup of tea large enough or a book long enough to suit me.”
by C.S. Lewis (about) [../../author/C-S-Lewis.html]
Tags: books [page/1/index.html] inspirational
[../inspirational/page/1/index.html] reading [../reading/page/1/index.html] tea
[../tea/page/1/index.html]
“If you only read the books that everyone else is reading, you can only think
what everyone else is thinking.” by Haruki Murakami (about)
[../../author/Haruki-Murakami.html]
Tags: books [page/1/index.html] thought [../thought/page/1/index.html]
“There is no friend as loyal as a book.” by Ernest Hemingway (about)
[../../author/Ernest-Hemingway.html]
Tags: books [page/1/index.html] friends [../friends/page/1/index.html]
novelist-quotes [../novelist-quotes/page/1/index.html]
“What really knocks me out is a book that, when you're all done reading it, you
wish the author that wrote it was a terrific friend of yours and you could call
him up on the phone whenever you felt like it. That doesn't happen much,
though.” by J.D. Salinger (about) [../../author/J-D-Salinger.html]
Tags: authors [../authors/page/1/index.html] books [page/1/index.html]
literature [../literature/page/1/index.html] reading
[../reading/page/1/index.html] writing [../writing/page/1/index.html]
“′Classic′ - a book which people praise and don't read.” by Mark Twain (about)
[../../author/Mark-Twain.html]
Tags: books [page/1/index.html] classic [../classic/page/1/index.html] reading
[../reading/page/1/index.html]
“I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one
tires of any thing than of a book! -- When I have a house of my own, I shall be
miserable if I have not an excellent library.” by Jane Austen (about)
[../../author/Jane-Austen.html]
Tags: books [page/1/index.html] library [../library/page/1/index.html] reading
[../reading/page/1/index.html]
“You have to write the book that wants to be written. And if the book will be
too difficult for grown-ups, then you write it for children.” by Madeleine
L'Engle (about) [../../author/Madeleine-LEngle.html]
Tags: books [page/1/index.html] children [../children/page/1/index.html]
difficult [../difficult/page/1/index.html] grown-ups
[../grown-ups/page/1/index.html] write [../write/page/1/index.html] writers
[../writers/page/1/index.html] writing [../writing/page/1/index.html]
 * Next → [page/2/index.html]


TOP TEN TAGS

love [../love/index.html] inspirational [../inspirational/index.html] life
[../life/index.html] humor [../humor/index.html] books [index.html] reading
[../reading/index.html] friendship [../friendship/index.html] friends
[../friends/index.html] truth [../truth/index.html] simile
[../simile/index.html]
QUOTES TO SCRAPE [../../../../index.html]

Login [../../../../login.html]


VIEWING TAG: READING [index.html]

“The more that you read, the more things you will know. The more that you learn,
the more places you'll go.” by Dr. Seuss (about)
[../../../../author/Dr-Seuss.html]
Tags: learning [../../../learning/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html] seuss
[../../../seuss/page/1/index.html]
“We read to know we're not alone.” by William Nicholson (about)
[../../../../author/William-Nicholson.html]
Tags: misattributed-to-c-s-lewis
[../../../misattributed-to-c-s-lewis/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html]
“A reader lives a thousand lives before he dies, said Jojen. The man who never
reads lives only one.” by George R.R. Martin (about)
[../../../../author/George-R-R-Martin.html]
Tags: read [../../../read/page/1/index.html] readers
[../../../readers/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html] reading-books
[../../../reading-books/page/1/index.html]
“You can never get a cup of tea large enough or a book long enough to suit me.”
by C.S. Lewis (about) [../../../../author/C-S-Lewis.html]
Tags: books [../../../books/page/1/index.html] inspirational
[../../../inspirational/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html] tea
[../../../tea/page/1/index.html]
“What really knocks me out is a book that, when you're all done reading it, you
wish the author that wrote it was a terrific friend of yours and you could call
him up on the phone whenever you felt like it. That doesn't happen much,
though.” by J.D. Salinger (about) [../../../../author/J-D-Salinger.html]
Tags: authors [../../../authors/page/1/index.html] books
[../../../books/page/1/index.html] literature
[../../../literature/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html] writing
[../../../writing/page/1/index.html]
“′Classic′ - a book which people praise and don't read.” by Mark Twain (about)
[../../../../author/Mark-Twain.html]
Tags: books [../../../books/page/1/index.html] classic
[../../../classic/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html]
“I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one
tires of any thing than of a book! -- When I have a house of my own, I shall be
miserable if I have not an excellent library.” by Jane Austen (about)
[../../../../author/Jane-Austen.html]
Tags: books [../../../books/page/1/index.html] library
[../../../library/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html]



TOP TEN TAGS

love [../../../love/index.html] inspirational
[../../../inspirational/index.html] life [../../../life/index.html] humor
[../../../humor/index.html] books [../../../books/index.html] reading
[../../index.html] friendship [../../../friendship/index.html] friends
[../../../friends/index.html] truth [../../../truth/index.html] simile
[../../../simile/index.html]
QUOTES TO SCRAPE [../../../../index.html]

Login [../../../../login.html]


VIEWING TAG: READING [index.html]

“The more that you read, the more things you will know. The more that you learn,
the more places you'll go.” by Dr. Seuss (about)
[../../../../author/Dr-Seuss.html]
Tags: learning [../../../learning/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html] seuss
[../../../seuss/page/1/index.html]
“We read to know we're not alone.” by William Nicholson (about)
[../../../../author/William-Nicholson.html]
Tags: misattributed-to-c-s-lewis
[../../../misattributed-to-c-s-lewis/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html]
“A reader lives a thousand lives before he dies, said Jojen. The man who never
reads lives only one.” by George R.R. Martin (about)
[../../../../author/George-R-R-Martin.html]
Tags: read [../../../read/page/1/index.html] readers
[../../../readers/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html] reading-books
[../../../reading-books/page/1/index.html]
“You can never get a cup of tea large enough or a book long enough to suit me.”
by C.S. Lewis (about) [../../../../author/C-S-Lewis.html]
Tags: books [../../../books/page/1/index.html] inspirational
[../../../inspirational/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html] tea
[../../../tea/page/1/index.html]
“What really knocks me out is a book that, when you're all done reading it, you
wish the author that wrote it was a terrific friend of yours and you could call
him up on the phone whenever you felt like it. That doesn't happen much,
though.” by J.D. Salinger (about) [../../../../author/J-D-Salinger.html]
Tags: authors [../../../authors/page/1/index.html] books
[../../../books/page/1/index.html] literature
[../../../literature/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html] writing
[../../../writing/page/1/index.html]
“′Classic′ - a book which people praise and don't read.” by Mark Twain (about)
[../../../../author/Mark-Twain.html]
Tags: books [../../../books/page/1/index.html] classic
[../../../classic/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html]
“I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one
tires of any thing than of a book! -- When I have a house of my own, I shall be
miserable if I have not an excellent library.” by Jane Austen (about)
[../../../../author/Jane-Austen.html]
Tags: books [../../../books/page/1/index.html] library
[../../../library/page/1/index.html] reading [index.html]



TOP TEN TAGS

love [../../../love/index.html] inspirational
[../../../inspirational/index.html] life [../../../life/index.html] humor
[../../../humor/index.html] books [../../../books/index.html] reading
[../../index.html] friendship [../../../friendship/index.html] friends
[../../../friends/index.html] truth [../../../truth/index.html] simile
[../../../simile/index.html]
